
[]{#index_split_000.html#p15} []{#index_split_000.html#p16}A

6

**A-a**

**Abgal**

Sun goddess. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akka-1. Desert god. Pre-Islamic
northern Arabian.

dian) and western Semitic. Consort of the sun Known from the Palmyrian
desert regions god SˇAMASˇ. Also AYA.

as a tutelary god of Bedouins and camel drivers.

2\. Minor attendant spirits. Mesopotamian **A'asˇ**

(Sumerian). Associated with ENKI and residing in God of wisdom. Hittite
and Hurrian. Derived the Abzu or primeval water.

from the Mesopotamian model of ENKI/EA. A'asˇ

keeps the tablets of fate.

**Abhijit** *(victorious)* Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Puranic). A
**Abandinus**

benevolent *naksatra* or astral deity; daughter of God of unknown
affinities. Romano-Celtic DAKSA and consort of CANDRA (SOMA).

(British). The name appears in an inscription at Godmanchester,
Cambridge, England.

**Abhijnaraja**

Physician god. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

**Abellio**

Accounted among a series of SMAN-BLA (medi-Tree god. Romano-Celtic
(Gallic). Known from cine buddhas). Typically depicted with stretched
inscriptions in the Garonne valley of southwest-earlobes. Color: red.

ern France and thought to be associated with apple trees.

**Abhimukhi** *(friendly disposed)* Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana).
One of **Abeona**

twelve deified BHUMIS recognized as different Goddess of passage. Roman.
Linked with the spiritual spheres through which a disciple goddess
ADEONA, she is concerned with the safe passes. Color: yellow.
Attributes: book and going-out and coming-in of a child.

staff.

1

[]{#index_split_000.html#p17}2 **Abnoba**

**Abnoba**

HACHACYUM. Responsible for the creation of Forest and river goddess.
Romano-Celtic (Conti-European immigrants, including their possessions
nental European). Known locally from the Black and products.

Forest region of Germany. The name "Avon,"

associated with many rivers, derives from her name.

**Acacila**

Animistic spirit. Aymara Indian \[Peru and Bolivia---Titicaca Basin\].
One of a group of **Abonsam**

vaguely defined beings who control the weather, Malevolent spirit. West
African. Recognized by including rain, hail and frost.

tribes in the Gold Coast, etc. Traditionally driven away in an annual
expulsion ritual by firing guns and shouting loudly, emptying houses of
furniture **Acala** *(immovable)*

and beating the interiors with sticks. The *abonsam* 1. Minor goddess.
Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of was finally driven into the sea. The ritual
was pre-twelve deified BHUMIS recognized as different ceded by four
weeks of total silence in the area.

spiritual spheres through which a disciple passes.

Color: white. Attributes: staff on a lotus.

2\. Tutelary god. Buddhist (Mahayana). Also a **Abu**

*dikpala* or guardian of the northeastern quarter.

Minor vegetation god. Mesopotamian (Sumer-Color: blue. Attributes:
jewel, lotus, staff and ian). Said to have sprung from the head of the
god sword.

ENKI, thus symbolizing plants emerging from the earth's soil.

**Acan**

God of wine. Mayan (Yucatec, classical Meso-Abundantia

american) \[Mexico\]. Identified with the local Minor fertility goddess.
Roman. The personifica-brew, *balche,* made from fermented honey to tion
of abundance. She continued in French myth-which the bark of the
*balche* tree has been added.

ology after the Roman occupation, as a lady who enters houses in the
night, bringing prosperity.

**Acat**

God of tattooers. Mayan (classical Mesoameri-Abzu

can) \[Mexico\].

Primordial deity of underground waters, the

"deep." Mesopotamian (Sumerian). His center of cult is at Eridu
(southern Mesopotamia), and he **Acca Larentia**

was replaced in Akkadian times by APSU.

Obscure mother goddess. Roman. Believed in some traditions to be the
mother of the LARES, but also the mother of the god HERCULES and the
**Ac Yanto** *(our helper)* adopted mother of Romulus, the founder of
Rome.

God of white men. Mayan (classical Mesoameri-She was celebrated in the
*Larentalia* festival on 23

can) \[Mexico\]. The brother of the creator god December, which was also
a feast of the dead.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p18}**Adibuddha** 3

**Acchupta** *(untouched)* astral symbolism. He may carry a scimitar
Goddess of learning. Jain \[India\]. One of sixteen embellished with a
single panther head and his VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

symbol is the lightning fork often fixed upon a pair of pincers.

*See also* HADAD \[Syrian\].

**Acolmiztli** *(shoulder-lion)* Minor chthonic underworld god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the deities **Adamas**

collectively classed as the MICTLANTECUHTLI Primordial creator being.
Gnostic Christian complex.

(Nassene). Recognized locally in Phrygia \[northwestern Turkey\] as an
androgynous force in the cosmos.

**Acolnahuacatl**

Minor chthonic underworld god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. One of the deities **Adeona**

collectively classed as the MICTLANTECUHTLI Goddess of passage. Roman.
See ABEONA.

complex.

**Adhimukticarya**

**ADAD** *(wind)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of **ORIGIN** Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian).

twelve deified BHUMIS recognized as different Weather god.

spiritual spheres through which a disciple passes.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1900 BC or Color: red. Attributes: red
lotus and staff.

earlier to circa 200 BC.

**SYNONYMS** Ramman (thunder); ISˇKUR (Sumerian).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Karakara and at Aleppo and **Adhimuktivasita**
*(control of confidence)* Mari \[Syria\].

Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of **ART REFERENCES** reliefs,
stelae, glyptics, etc.

twelve VASITAS or goddesses personifying the dis-LITERARY SOURCES
cuneiform texts including ciplines of spiritual regeneration. Color:
white.

*Atrahasis,* inscriptions.

Attribute: flower bud.

Adad is derived from the older (Sumerian) model of Isˇkur. At Mari
\[Syria\] he enjoyed a **Adibuddha** *(the primeval buddha)* major cult
following. Occasionally the subject The original BUDDHA. Buddhist. The
primordial of a sacred marriage ceremony in parts of force in the cosmos
from whom the five Mesopotamia and Syria. His father is the
DHYANIBUDDHAS arose. The embodiment of the supreme sky god ANU. He is
described as a concept of emptiness. He is considered by some benevolent
giver of life in the fields but is also a authorities to be identical
with Vaharaja and more violent storm god. His name in Akkadian
Vajrasattva. His image, sitting on a lotus leaf, is cuneiform means
"wind." His animal is the bull.

often carried by other Buddhist deities. Epithets In human form he is
depicted wearing horned include Svabhava (self-creating), Svayambhu
headdress and tiered skirt or robe decorated with (self-enlightened).

[]{#index_split_000.html#p19}4 **Adidharma**

**Adidharma** *(the primeval law)* mordial goddess ADITI. Also an
epithet for SURYA.

Primordial goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Attributes: two or more lotuses.

Particularly worshiped in Lamaism, she is the SAKTI of ADIBUDDHA.
Attributes: cup and knife.

**ADONIS** *(lord)*

**ORIGIN** Hellenic name adopted predominantly **Adikia**

in Phoenician and Syrian culture and based on Goddess of injustice.
Greek. An ugly figure who an old western Semitic deity \[Lebanon and is
depicted on the Kypselos Chest being throttled Syria\]. Fertility and
vegetation god.

by the goddess of justice DIKE.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 200 BC (Seleucid period) to circa AD
400.

**SYNONYMS** Adon (lord, Semitic).

**Adimurti** *(the primeval personification)* **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
mainly at Berytus and Aphaca.

Form or *avatara* of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures, plaques, votive ste-and Puranic). Probably very similar to
NARAYANA.

lae, glyptics, etc.

Conventionally perceived as Visňu seated on the **LITERARY SOURCES**
various literary texts (few coils of the serpent SESA (Adisesa) and
attended inscriptions).

by two wives. Attributes: those of Visňu. Also Vai-kunthanatha,
Paramapathanatha.

Adonis is modeled on the Mesopotamian dying vegetation god DUMUZI
(Hebrew: Tammuz). He appears as a youthful deity. The river Adonis
**Aditi**

*(the free one)*

\[Nahr Ibrahim\] is sacred to him largely because its Archaic mother
goddess. Hindu (Vedic). Accord-waters flow red after heavy winter rains,
having ing to the *Rg Veda* Aditi is said to be the wife of become
saturated with ferrous oxide. In Hellenic KASYAPA or of BRAHMA and
mother of the tradition he is the son of the mythical Cyprian ADITYAS, a
group of minor gods including MITRA, king Cinyras and his mother is
MYRRHA. Accord-ARYAMAN, BHAGA, VARUNA, DAKSA and Anisa. No ing to Hesiod
he is also the son of Phoenix and other consort is mentioned in the
literature. She is Alphesiboea. He is the consort of APHRODITE.

also accounted as the mother of HARI. Other leg-Tradition has it that he
was killed by a boar dur-ends account her as the mother of the rain god
ing a hunting expedition and is condemned to the INDRA. No human
physical features are drawn, underworld for six months of each year,
during though she is sometimes identified in the guise of which the
earth's vegetation parches and dies a cow. Aditi is also perceived as a
guardian goddess under the summer sun and drought. He was hon-who brings
prosperity and who can free her devo-ored in a spring festival when
priests in effeminate tees from problems and clear away obstacles. She
costume gashed themselves with knives. Fre-disappears largely from later
Hindu traditions.

quently depicted nude and sometimes carrying a lyre. Also ATTIS
(Phrygian); ATUNIS (Etruscan).

**Aditya** *(descendant of Aditi)* Collective name for sun gods. Hindu
(Vedic and **Adrastea**

Puranic). These numbered six in Vedic times but Mountain goddess.
Hellenized Phrygian \[north-later increased to twelve. The sons of the
pri-western Turkey\]. Probably derived from a local

[]{#index_split_000.html#p20}**AENGUS** 5

Anatolian mountain deity. Known from inscrip-LITERARY SOURCES Icelandic
codices; *Prose Edda* tions in Greece from circa 400 BC as a deity who
(Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo).

defends the righteous. It is uncertain whether she bears any link with
the Celtic goddess ANDRASTA.

A lesser known AESIR god of Asgard concerned with the moods of the sea
and their implications for mariners. The river Eider was known to the
**Adro**

Vikings as "Aegir's Door." Aegir is also depicted Tutelary god. Lugbara
\[Lake Albert, East Africa\].

in some poetry as the "ale brewer," perhaps an The personification of
grass fires and whirlwinds allusion to the caldrons of mead which were
who, in antiquity, created mankind. Thought to thought to come from
under the sea (see also the live in the vicinity of rivers with many
wives and Celtic deities DAGDA and GOBNIU). There are children.

references in literature to Saxons sacrificing captives, probably to
Aegir, before setting sail for home. Linked in uncertain manner to the
**Aeacos**

goddess RAN he was believed to have sired nine Chthonic underworld god.
Greco-Roman. One children, the waves of the sea, who were possi-of three
judges of Hades assessing the souls of bly giantesses.

the dead entering the underworld (see also MINOS

and RHADAMANTHOS). Identified by Plato as the son of ZEUS and Aigina. In
the *Theogony* (Hesiod), **AENGUS**

Aeacos is also the consort of Psamathe and father **ORIGIN** Celtic
(Irish). Of uncertain status.

of Phocos. Also Aiakos.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 500 BC or earlier until
Christianization circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** Mac Oc; Aengus Oc.

**Aed**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Brugh na Boinne (Valley of Chthonic underworld
god. Celtic (Irish). Known the Boyne).

from inscriptions. Aed mac Lir, son of LIR and **ART REFERENCES**
various monumental carvings Aobh was, according to tradition, turned
into a and inscriptions.

swan by his stepmother, Aoife.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Books of Invasions*; *Cycles of* *Kings*.

**AEGIR** *(water)*

The son of the DAGDA by "the wife of Elcmar"

**ORIGIN** Icelandic (Nordic). God of the ocean.

(one of the kings of Tara) who may have been **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
Viking period (circa the goddess BOANN, Aengus lived in the Valley AD
700) but probably earlier, through to Chris-of the Boyne and was closely
linked with the tianization (circa AD 1100).

ancient funerary tumuli in the region. According **SYNONYMS** none
known.

to legend, Aengus fell in love with a maiden **CENTER(S) OF CULT** none
known but probably whose identity he sought in vain. As he wasted
enjoyed sanctuaries along the west coast of away, his father and mother
made enquiries Norway and elsewhere in Nordic region.

until they located Caer, daughter of the king of **ART REFERENCES**
runic inscriptions; reliefs in Cannaught, who lived on Loch Bel Dragon
in metal and stone.

the shape of a swan with 150 attendant swans.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p21}6 **Aeolos**

Aengus eventually found her and he also **AESIR**

changed into a bird.

**ORIGIN** Icelandic (Nordic). The major race of sky gods in Norse
religion.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa **Aeolos**

AD 700) but developed earlier, until Christian-God of storms and winds.
Greek. One of the sons ization (circa AD 1100) and in some instances of
POSEIDON, said to have presented the winds in beyond.

a leather bag to the hero Odysseus, and to have **SYNONYMS** none known.

given the sail to seafarers. According to legend his **CENTER(S) OF
CULT** throughout areas of Nordic home was the Aeolian Island \[Lipari
Island\]. In influence, particularly at Uppsala in Sweden.

one legend he is married to EOS and is the father **ART REFERENCES**
engraving on stone and wea-of six sons, the various directional winds.
The pons; other art objects etc.

hexagonal Temple of Winds, on each side of which **LITERARY SOURCES**
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* is depicted a flying figure of one of
the winds, and (Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); various classi-which
is dedicated to Aeolos, still stands at Athens.

cal authors.

The twelve Aesir gods are headed by OTHIN, the **Aeolus**

All-Father (see also the Koryak Siberian deity God of storms and winds.
Roman. Derived QUIKINN.A'QU) and probably are, in part, derived from the
Greek storm god AEOLOS, he is the from a Germanic pantheon established
in prehis-consort of AURORA and the father of six sons, tory. The Aesir
follow a common pattern whereby BOREAS the north wind, CORUS the
northwest cultures establish a "senior" pantheon of great gods wind,
AQUILO the west wind, NOTUS the south-which usually number seven or
twelve. Some of west wind, Eurus the east wind and ZEPHYRUS

these are creator gods but do not necessarily the south wind.

include the archetypal founders of the cosmos. In mythology the Aesir
exist in a realm known as Asgard, one of a number of heavens perceived
in **Aequitas**

Nordic and Germanic lore. The gods live in great Minor god. Roman.
Spirit of fair dealing, known halls. Othin occupies Valaskjalf, roofed
with silver, particularly from the second century BC.

and in a separate building, Valhall, he assembles slain mortal heroes.
These warriors will one day serve to defend Asgard in the final
onslaught **Aericura**

against the established order by the frost giants Chthonic underworld
god. Romano-Celtic.

and other adversaries. The Aesir fought a primal Known only from
inscriptions.

battle with a rival group of gods, the VANIR. Their constant enemies,
though, are the Frost Giants, the Midgard Serpent, a huge sea snake
encircling **Aesculapius**

the Nordic lands, and Fenrir, the great wolf who God of healing. Roman.
Developed from the will catch and swallow the sun at the day of doom,
Greek deity ASKLEPIOS and introduced into Ragnarok. At that time it is
foretold that the gods Rome in 293 BC as a plague god. Attributes of
Asgard will perish, and earth will be consumed include the *caduceus*
(winged scepter), the symbol by fire, finally to be cleansed by the
rising waters of modern medicine.

of the sea before being born anew.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p22}**Ah Bolon Dz'acab** 7

**Aether**

God of the sacrificial fire and the intercessor Primordial god of light.
Greco-Roman. A between gods and mankind, Agni is the son of remote
cosmic deity, the son of EREBOS

KASYAPA and ADITI or, alternatively, of Dyaus (darkness) and NYX (night)
who overthrew and PRTHIVI. His consort is Svaha and, accord-these
archetypal deities of chaos. In Hesiod's ing to some texts, he is the
father of the god *Epic Cycle* he is also described as the father of
SKANDA. In a destructive capacity he is seen as an OURANOS.

aspect of the god SˇIVA. He is also a guardian or *dikpala* of the
southeastern quarter. In ancient hymns he is said to have been born in
wood as **Agathos Daimon** *(good demon)* the embryo life force of all
trees and plants and God of fortune. Greco-Roman. Known locally he
emerges when wood is rubbed together.

from Alexandria and depicted in the form of a Vehicles: a she-goat, or a
chariot drawn by red snake. May have originated as an androgynous horses
or parrots. Color: red.

fertility spirit, but later becomes identified as Attributes: seven arms
and sometimes the head the consort of Agathe Tyche (see TYCHE). Liba-of
a goat, carrying a wide variety of objects.

tions were made regularly to this deity after meals and he was regarded
as a friendly household guardian.

**Agnikumara**

God. Jain \[India\]. One of the groups under the general title of
BHAVANAVASI (dwelling in places).

**Age**

They have a youthful appearance and are associ-God of animals. Fon
\[Benin, West Africa\].

ated with rain and thunder.

Revered by hunters in the savannah regions.

**Agnostos Theos**

**Aglibol**

The unknown god(s) usually addressed in the plu-Moon god. Pre-Islamic
northern Arabian.

ral form. Greco-Roman. They were the subject of Known from Palmyra and
linked with the sun altar inscriptions, particularly in Athens, probably
god Yarhibol. The cult continued into Hellenic out of concern lest
certain less popular deities be times and was later extended to Rome.
Attributes neglected or forgotten.

include a sickle moon.

**Agu'gux**

**AGNI** *(fire)*

Creator god. Aleut \[Aleutian Islands\]. The name **ORIGIN** Hindu
\[India\]. God of fire.

given to the Christian god under Russian Ortho-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 1500 BC

dox influence.

onward and still recognized.

**SYNONYMS** none.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** known throughout areas of **Ah Bolon Dz'acab**
*(many generations)* Hindu influence.

Chthonic fertility god. Mayan (classical Meso-ART REFERENCES sculptures
and reliefs in metal american) \[Mexico\]. A god identified with rain
and stone.

and thunder. Also strongly linked with agriculture **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Rg Veda* and other texts.

and young crops. Possibly a vegetation *avatara* of

[]{#index_split_000.html#p23}8 **Ah Cancun**

the iguana god ITZAM NA. Attributes include a powers of evil associated
with darkness. Said to be leaf-like ornament worn in the nose. Also God
K.

carried through the underworld at night on the shoulders of the god
Sucunyum. Ah Kin is prayed to at sunrise and rituals include the burning
of **Ah Cancun**

incense. He is invoked to cure illness and to bring Hunting god. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) wives to bachelors. Attributes include a square

\[Mexico\]. One of a number of deities in Mayan third eye subtended by a
loop, a strong Roman religion identified with the hunt and the
protec-nose, a squint and incisor teeth filed to a T-shape.

tion of animals. Also Acanum.

Also Acan Chob (Lacandon); Chi Chac Chob; Kinich Ahau; God G.

**Ah Chun Caan** *(he of the base of the sky)* Local god. Mayan
(Yucatec, classical Mesoamer-Ah Kin Xoc

ican) \[Mexico\]. The tutelary deity of the city of God of poetry. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) Merida. Mentioned in the Vienna Dictionary.

\[Mexico\]. Regarded as a great singer and musician since most Mayan
poetry is sung or chanted. He may appear as a hummingbird and **Ah
Ciliz**

is considered by some authorities to be an God of solar eclipses. Mayan
(classical Meso-avatara of the sun god. Also Ah Kin Xocbiltun; american)
\[Mexico\]. He is said to eat the sun dur-P'izlimtec.

ing an eclipse, but at other times attends upon the sun god, serving him
meals.

**Ah Kumix Uinicob**

Attendant water gods. Mayan (Yucatec, classical **Ah Cuxtal** *(come to
life)* Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The four diminutive God of birth. Mayan
(Lacandon, classical Meso-deities which take over from the giant AH
PATNAR

american) \[Mexico\]. Responsible for the safe UINICOB deities during
the dry season.

delivery of women.

**Ah Mun**

**Ah Hulneb**

*(he of the spear thrower)*

Maize god. Mayan (Yucatec, classical Mesoamer-God of war. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) ican) \[Mexico\]. The deity responsible for
pro-

\[Mexico\]. The local guardian deity of the city of tecting the unripe
maize.

Cozumel.

**Ah Muzencab**

**Ah Kin** *(he of the sun)* Bee gods. Mayan (Yucatec, classical
Mesoameri-Sun god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-can) \[Mexico\].
The patron deities of apiarists still ico\]. A deity of ambivalent
personality, the young invoked in parts of the Yucatan. They are thought
suitor of the moon goddess Acna, also the aged to be represented
iconographically on the tops sun god in the sky. He is feared as the
bringer of and bottoms of stone columns at the site of drought, but also
protects mankind from the Chichen Itza as aged men with long beards and

[]{#index_split_000.html#p24}**AHURA MAZDA** 9

upraised arms. They wear loin cloths with dis-Ahriman

tinctive cross-hatching.

Chthonic god of darkness. Zoroastrian (Farsi-Persian). The antagonist of
AHURA MAZDA, god of light, and his attendant, MITHRA. The name is a **Ah
Patnar Uinicob**

*(owners of the jars men)*

modern derivation of the original Avestan title Attendant water gods.
Mayan (Yucatec, classical ANGRU MAINYU. Ahriman is said to have tried to
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Four huge deities who persuade his attendant
animals, including the scor-pour water on to the earth from jars. The
end of pion, ant and snake, to drink the blood of the bull the dry
season is marked on May 3, completing an slain by Mithra in the primeval
legend of dualistic eight-day rain ceremony.

conflict (see Mithra); if he had succeeded he would have prevented life
from forming on earth. In another legend he tried to thwart Ahura Mazda
by **Ah Peku**

sending a flood to destroy the world. Also recog-Thunder god. Mayan
(Lacandon, classical nized in Roman Mithraism. Rituals included
ani-Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. He lives on the tops of mal sacrifice.
Also ARIMANIUS (Roman).

hills and climbs into the clouds before it rains.

**AHURA MAZDA**

**Ah Tabai**

**ORIGIN** Persian \[Iran\]. God of light.

Hunting god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 1500 BC to

\[Mexico\]. One of a number of deities in Mayan end of Roman Empire
period, circa AD 400.

religion identified with the hunt and the protec-SYNONYMS none.

tion of animals.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout ancient Near East during Persian and
Roman Empire periods.

**ART REFERENCES** various sculptures and reliefs.

**Ah Uincir Dz'acab**

**LITERARY SOURCES** Avestia.

God of healing. Mayan (Chorti, classical Mesoamerican) \[eastern
Guatemala\]. The patron of Ahura Mazda probably originates as the Hindu
herbalists and concerned with the preparation of Vedic god VARUNA. In
Persian religion he remedies, he is depicted as having male and becomes
the god of light and truth in the Zoroas-female identities, each
concerned with the healing trian concept of dualism. His chief attendant
god of their respective sexes. Also Ah Uincir Kopot.

is MITHRA(S) and his adversary is AHRIMAN, the god of darkness.
According to tradition his first creation, a wild bull, was confined to
a cave by **Ah Uuc Ticab**

MITHRAS. When it escaped, Mithras was charged Chthonic god. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) with finding and slaying it. The bull's blood
fell to

\[Mexico\]. Minor fertility and vegetation deity.

earth and from the drops life formed. Ahura Mazda is not mentioned in
Roman Mithraic inscriptions but he is, by implication, the central
**Aha** *(grandmother)*

figure in Mithraism. In the Mithraeum in Rome River spirit. Yakut
\[central Siberia\]. The guardian ( *S. Prisca*), Ahura Mazda is
considered to be a and apotheosis of rivers.

reclining figure on whom Mithras attends.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p25}10 **Ahurani**

Although never popular among the civilian pop-Ajaya *(invincible)*

ulation, Mithraism spread under Flavius and was Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-widespread among the Roman military, though it dant
of BUDDHAKAPALA.

always enjoyed a greater following in the east than in the west. It was
one symptom of the more general Roman return to sun worship. In AD 307,
a **Aje**

sanctuary on the Danube was dedicated to Goddess of wealth. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Mithras (and Ahura Mazda) in an effort to sustain
Africa\]. She is thought to appear as a fowl scratch-military power in
the empire.

ing the earth and, in creation mythology, was sent down with ODUDUWA,
the earth goddess.

**Ahurani** *(mistress of Ahura)* Fertility goddess. Zoroastrian
(Persian). Invoked **Aji-Shiki-Taka-Hiko-Ne**

by ordinary people to bring prosperity and chil-Rain god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of the RAIJIN

dren. Water libations were a key part of the ritual.

deities whose name is often linked with that of KAMO-WAKA-IKAZUCHI.

**Ai Apaec**

Supreme god. Mochica Indian (pre-Columbian **Ajysyt**

South America) \[northern coast of Peru\]. Probably Maternal spirit.
Yakut \[central Siberia\]. The originated as a jaguar god but came to
rule the des-deity who oversees the lying-in of an expectant tinies of
the world. He was thought to live like ordi-mother and who brings the
child's soul to the nary people and could reveal himself as man or god
child-bed. The term *ajysyt* can also apply to a at will. He is depicted
in anthropomorphic form, male spirit, thus the *ajysyt* that oversees
the birth but with huge fangs and a cat-like wrinkled face of horses is
male, while that of horned cattle is with whiskers coming from his nose.
He received female.

sacrificial victims hurled from the top of a high cliff.

**Akasagarbha** *(essence of the sky)* **Aides**

See HADES.

Astral god. Buddhist (Mahayana) and Lamaist

\[Tibet\]. One of the BODHISATTVAS or spiritual meditation buddhas. He
lives in the "womb of **Aine**

the sky." Color: green. Attributes: book, jewel, Obscure sky or sun
goddess. Celtic (Irish). May lotus and sun disc. Also Khagarbha. In
Japanese have an association with horses.

Buddhism this deity becomes the god Kokuzo.

**Ajalamo**

**Akelos**

God of unborn children. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West River god. Greek. The son
of OKEANOS and Africa\]. According to legend, in some vague TETHYS.
According to mythology he was a rival mythological realm there exist
rows of shelves suitor for Deianeira who became the wife of HER-with
spirits of the unborn. These are the respon-AKLES. He was the consort of
Melpomene and his sibility of Ajalamo.

daughters were allegedly the *sirenes.* A river of the

[]{#index_split_000.html#p26}**Ala** 11

same name runs into the Ionian Sea. Attributes **Aksayajnana-Karmanda**
*(undecaying* include bull horns. Also Achlae (Etrurian).

*knowledge of Karma)*

Deification of literature. Buddhist. One of a group of twelve DHARANIS
*.* Color: red. Attrib-Aken

utes: basket with jewels, and staff.

Chthonic underworld god. Egyptian. The keeper of the underworld ferry
boat.

**AKSOBHYA** *(imperturbable)* **ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. The second
*dhyani-Aker*

*buddha* or meditation buddha.

Chthonic earth god of passage. Egyptian. Known **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 500 BC to from the Old Kingdom (circa 2700 BC onward).

present.

Controls the interface between eastern and west-SYNONYMS Vajrasana;
Vajraheruka.

ern horizons of the underworld, and is the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
pan-Asiatic.

guardian of the gate through which the king **ART REFERENCES** metal and
stone sculptures, passes into the underworld. Aker provides a safe
paintings.

course for the barque of the sun god during its **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Sadhanamala* and Tantric rit-passage through the underworld at night.
He may ual texts.

be seen as the socket holding the boat's mast. He is also considered
benevolent against snake bites.

One of five mystic spiritual counterparts of a Represented by opposite
facing pairs of human or human buddha in Vajrayana Buddhism. A product
lion heads.

of the ADIBUDDHA who represents the branch of the cosmos concerned with
consciousness. He originates from the blue mantra HUM and lives in
**Akeru**

the eastern paradise Abhirati. His SAKTI is LOCANA Pluralistic chthonic
earth gods. Egyptian. Prob-and he is normally accompanied by two
elephants.

ably stemming from the pre-Dynastic period.

Color: blue. Attributes include bell, three monk-Malevolent deities who
can seize and imprison ish robes and staff, also jewel, lotus, prayer
wheel the souls of the deceased.

and sword. Aksobhya may also be a tutelary deity in Lamaism \[Tibet\] in
which case his attributes are similar. Emanations include HERUKA,
MANJUSRI, **Akonadi**

VAJRAPANI and a large number of minor names.

Oracular goddess. Ghanaian \[West Africa\]. Known *See also* AMITABHA,
AMOGHASIDDHI, RATin the region around Accra where she has had a
NASAMBHAVA and VAIROCANA.

celebrated oracular shrine. She is regarded as a goddess of justice and
a guardian deity of women.

**Ala**

Chthonic fertility goddess. Ibo \[eastern Nigeria, **Akongo**

West Africa\]. A popular deity who is also goddess Creator god. Ngombe
\[Democratic Republic of of the underworld linked with a cult of the
dead Congo, central Africa\]. The supreme deity con-

(which rest in her womb). Her temple is the Mbari sidered to have given
the world, and all that is in which contains a cult statue depicting the
goddess it, form and substance.

seated with a child in her arms and adorned with

[]{#index_split_000.html#p27}12 **Alad Udug Lama** the crescent moon.
She is flanked by attendant **Alcis**

deities. She enjoys a profusion of local shrines Unknown status.
Germanic and possibly Ice-which are well supplied with votive offerings.
Seri-landic (Nordic). The Alcis are twin deities ous crimes including
murder are considered to be (brothers) known only as sons of the sky
gods.

offenses against her. An annual yam festival is cel-From Germanic times
we have a La Tene urn ebrated in her honor. Also Ale, Ana, ANI.

with pictures of paired men on horseback and linked by a wooden beam.
Tacitus describes the worship of twin gods by the Naharvali tribe, their
**Alad Udug Lama**

priests dressed in effeminate costume (see also Collective name of
guardian deities. Mesopo-the Phrygian deity ATTIS). They may have been
tamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian).

worshiped in forest sanctuaries along the north-Vague spirits who
accompany major deities and ern coast of Europe.

dispense good fortune.

**Alemona**

**Alaisiagae**

Goddess of passage. Roman. Concerned with the Minor goddesses.
Romano-Celtic (British). They health of the unborn child.

are identified at Houseteads (Northumberland) in a shrine to Mars
Thincsus.

**Alisanos**

Local chthonic earth god. Romano-Celtic (Gal-Alalu

lic). Known only from inscription in the region of Primordial god.
Hittite and Hurrian. The arche-the Côte d'Or and associated with the
land. Also typal deity who precedes AN(U) in the formation Alisonus,
Alisanus.

of the cosmos. He was identified by the Greeks as HYPSISTOS (the
highest).

**Alk'unta'm**

Sun god. Bella Coola Indian \[British Columbia, **Alatangana**

Canada\]. Linked closely with SENX, both are of Creator god. Kono
\[eastern Guinea, West Africa\].

equal significance. His mother is a cannibal One of two creator deities;
the other is SA. ALA-woman, Nunuso' mikeeqone'im, who can turn TANGANA
created land from swamp and placed into a mosquito.

vegetation on earth.

VAJRAPANI and a large number of minor names.

*See also* AMITABHA, AMOGHASIDDHI, RATNASAM-ALLAH

BHAVA and VAIROCANA.

**ORIGIN** Nabataean and Arabic. Derived from the western Semitic god
Il.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 300 BC until **Alaunus**

present.

Local god. Romano-Celtic (Continental Euro-SYNONYMS none.

pean). Known from areas around Mannheim and **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Mecca
\[Saudi Arabia\].

Salzburg. The Romans syncretized him with **ART REFERENCES** none.

MERCURIUS.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Qur'an.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p28}**AMATERASU-O-MI-KAMI** 13

The creator god of Islam. Perceived in pre-Ama-arhus

Islamic times as the creator of the earth and water.

Fertility goddess. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Named by the prophet
Muhammad as the one Akkadian). Mentioned in texts as being among true
god and given a hundred names or epithets the pantheon at Uruk in
Hellenistic times but in the Qur'an, ninety-nine of which are known to
also found as an earlier manifestation of the god mankind and accounted
on the rosary beads; the GULA. Also Arad-Ama-arhus, Amat-Ama-arhus.

final name remains a mystery. No representation of Allah is made in art.

**Amaethon**

God of agriculture. Celtic (Welsh). A son of DON

**Allat**

*(goddess)*

and brother of GWYDION, he is known from a Astral and tutelary goddess.
Pre-Islamic northern limited number of Welsh texts and was engaged and
central Arabian. One of the three daughters in a mythical battle against
the ARAWN. Associ-of ALLAH. At Palmyra she was regularly invoked ated
with ploughing and husbandry. The modern as a domestic guardian either
as Allat or ASTARTE

Welsh name for a farmer is *amaethwr.*

with whom she is closely linked. At Ta'if she was symbolized in the form
of a white granite stone.

In Hellenic times she became syncretized with **Amasˇagnul**

ATHENA or, according to Herodotus who called Fertility goddess.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-her Alilat, with APHRODITE.

Akkadian). Mentioned in prebend documents *See also* ATARSˇAMAIN.

from the Hellenistic period at Uruk and thought to be the consort of the
god PAPSUKKAL.

**Allatu(m)**

Chthonic underworld goddess. Western Semitic.

**AMATERASU-O-MI-KAMI**

Modeled on the Mesopotamian goddess ERESˇ-ORIGIN Shinto \[Japan\]. Sun
goddess.

KIGAL and possibly also equating with ARSAY in **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 600 or ear-Canaanite mythology. Recognized by the
lier until present.

Carthaginians as Allatu.

**SYNONYMS** Shinmei; O-Hiru-Me-No-Muchi; Tensho-Ko-Daijin.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Ise Naiku shrine; many oth-Almaqah

ers throughout Japan.

Tutelary astral god. Pre-Islamic southern Ara-ART REFERENCES sculptures
and paintings, etc.

bian. Worshiped by the Saba tribe, his sacred ani-LITERARY SOURCES
*Nihongi; Kojiki* (Japanese mal is the bull. Attributes include
lightning bolts sacred texts).

and a sinuate weapon.

The central figure of Shintoism and the ancestral deity of the imperial
house. One of the daughters **Alpanu**

of the primordial god IZANAGI and said to be his Chthonic underworld
goddess. Etruscan.

favorite offspring, she was born from his left eye.

Depicted wearing jewels, a loose cloak and san-She is the sibling of
SUSANO-WO, the storm god.

dals but otherwise naked. Also arguably a goddess According to mythology
she and Susano-Wo of sexual love.

are obliged to join each other in order to survive.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p29}14 **Ama-Tsu-Mara** Susano-Wo ascends with
her to heaven but is deity especially called on at times of royal
acces-thrown out after trying to enter her house and sion. As a
fertility goddess she was largely eclipsed committing various excesses.
Amaterasu refuses by the goddess MUT. She is sometimes equated to be
sullied and obstinately hides herself away in with NEITH, the creator
goddess of Sais, and her a cave. It requires the combined diplomacy and
attributes may include the red crown of the Delta.

craft of many other deities to persuade her to come out. The lure is the
"perfect divine mirror"

in which she sees her reflection. The birth of the **Ame-No-Kagase-Wo**

two deities is considered to mark the transition Astral deity. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The most important between cosmic and material genesis.

of the star *KAMI* said to have been executed by the The Ise Naiku
sanctuary is visited by about five god FUTSU-NUSHI because he would not
be paci-million devotees each year and Amaterasu takes fied during the
process of cosmic genesis.

pride of place in every family shrine. Sometimes her shrines are placed
adjacent to those of Susano-Wo. She is also the tutelary goddess of
**Ame-No-Mi-Kumari-No-Kami**

the emperor. Hers tends to be a monotheistic cult Water goddess. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of the daugh-in which all other deities take a
subservient place.

ters of MINATO-NO-KAMI, the god of river mouths Though powerful she does
not always succeed and estuaries, she is known as the "heavenly water
and is often subject to attack. She has been divider" and her cult is
linked with that of Kuni-arguably identified with the god VAIROCANA in
No-Mi-Kumari-No-Kami.

Buddhist religion.

**AME-NO-MINAKA-NUSHI-NO-**

**Ama-Tsu-Mara**

**KAMI**

*(the deity master of the august center* God of smiths. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Depicted as a *of heaven)*

one-eyed ithyphallic god comparable to the **ORIGIN** Shinto \[Japan\].
Supreme god.

Greek Cyclopes. He is strongly instrumental in **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 600 until fashioning the "perfect divine mirror" with
which present.

the sun goddess, AMATERASU, is lured from her **SYNONYMS** none
significant.

cave. Also Ma-Hiko-Tsu-No-Kami.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none.

**ART REFERENCES** none.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Kojiki* (Japanese sacred text).

**Amaunet** *(the hidden one)* Fertility goddess. Egyptian (Upper).
Amaunet The highest deity of the Shinto pantheon and the seems to have a
taken a role as an early consort of first to emerge in *Takama-No-Hara*
(the plain of AMUN, one of the eight deities of the OGDOAD and high
heaven) when heaven and earth were fash-representing hidden power. In
that context she is ioned. He was born alone, resides in the ninth
depicted anthropomorphically but with the head heaven and has always
hidden himself from mor-of a snake. She is shown in reliefs and as the
subtal eyes. A remote and vague figure of whom no ject of a notable
statue from the Record Hall of images are ever made and toward whom no
cult is Tuthmosis III at the Karnak complex of Thebes, directed. His
name only appears once in the *Kojiki* where she was recognized as a
benign protective and never in the *Nihongi.* Originally his identity

[]{#index_split_000.html#p30}**AMITABHA** 15

may have been strongly influenced by Chinese **Am-Heh**

religion. His name is linked closely with those of Chthonic underworld
god. Egyptian. A minor two other lesser primordial beings,
TAKA-MI-MISdeity said to inhabit a lake of fire. The so-called
UBI-NO-KAMI and KAMI-MISUBI-NO-KAMI.

"devourer of the millions." Depicted with the head of a hound.

**Ame-No-Tanabata-Hime-No-Mikoto** Astral goddess of weavers. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of **Amida**

two star apotheoses who are, according to tradi-Primordial deity.
Buddhist (Japanese). The Japan-tion, deeply in love with each other. Her
partner ese equivalent of AMITABHA recognized from the is HIKOBOSHI. Her
name is generally abbreviated eleventh and twelfth centuries AD.

to Tanabata, the title of a festival in honor of the goddess which
became a national event in Japan in AD 755. The festival later became
merged with **Amimitl**

the Tibetan Bon *Ullumbana* festival of the dead.

Minor god of lakes and fish hunters. Aztec Also Shokujo.

(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively
classed as the MIXCOATL-CAMAXTLI complex.

**Ame-No-Toko-Tachi-No-Kami**

*(deity*

*standing eternally in heaven)* Primordial being. Shinto \[Japan\]. The
fifth of the **AMITABHA**

*(of unmeasured splendor)*

deities to emerge in the heavens, named in both **ORIGIN** Buddhist
\[India\]. The fourth *dhyani-the sacred texts of Shintoism, the
*Kojiki* and *buddha* or meditation *buddha.**

*Nihongi*, but probably strongly influenced by Chi-KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP circa 500 BC to nese religion. Born from a reed floating in the
present.

primeval waters.

**SYNONYMS** Vajradharma and possibly Amitayaus.

*See also* UMASHI-ASHI-KABI-HIKO-JI-NO-KAMI.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** pan-Asiatic.

**ART REFERENCES** metal and stone sculptures, paintings.

**Ame-No-Uzume**

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Sadhanamala* and Tantric rit-Goddess of dancers.
Shinto \[Japan\]. She plays a ual texts.

part in enticing the sun goddess, AMATERASU, from her cave using the
perfect divine mirror.

One of five mystic spiritual counterparts of a human *buddha* in
Vajrayana Buddhism. A product of the Adibuddha who represents the branch
of **Ame-Waka-Hiko** *(heavenly young prince)* the cosmos concerned with
consciousness. He God. Shinto \[Japan\]. According to tradition he
originates from the red mantra HRIH and lives in was sent to earth on a
vital mission but became the western paradise Sukhavati. The cult may
preoccupied with a number of mortal women, have been influenced by
Iranian light religions.

forgot his purpose and did not report back to His SAKTI is PANDARA and
he is normally accom-heaven. His punishment was to be slain by an panied
by two peacocks. Color: red. Attributes: arrow fired from the "heavenly
true deer bow."

lock of hair, lotus, monk's robe and water jar.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p31}16 **Amm**

Amitabha is also taken as a tutelary god in **Ammut** *(devouress of the
dead)* Lamaism \[Tibet\] in which case his attributes Chthonic
underworld goddess. Egyptian. A sig-include bell, jewel and three
monkish robes. Ema-nificant deity who allegedly consumes the dead if
nations include PADMAPANI, MANJUSRI and many their hearts are found
weighed down with guilt in other minor names.

the Judgment Hall of the Two Truths during the *See also* AKSOBHYA,
AMOGHASIDDHI, RAT-Weighing of the Heart ceremony. Ammut has a NASAMBHAVA
and VAIROCANA.

fearsome aspect and sits alongside forty-two juror gods named in the
*Book of the Dead.* Depicted with the head of a crocodile, the trunk and
fore-limbs **Amm**

of a lion and the hind part of a hippopotamus.

Moon god. Pre-Islamic southern Arabian. The *See also* THOTH and MAAT.

tutelary deity of the Qataban tribe. Also revered as a weather god.
Attributes include lightning bolts.

**Amoghapasa**

God. Buddhist. A variety of AVALOKITESVARA, **Amma (1)**

depicted with one head and six, eight or twenty Local tutelary god.
Dravidian (Tamil). Known hands. Attributes: arrow, bell, lotus, noose,
prayer from southern India.

wheel, rosary, staff and tiger skin.

**Amma (2)**

**AMOGHASIDDHI** *(unfailing power)* Creator god. Dogon \[Mali, West
Africa\]. He **ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. The fifth *dhyanibuddha*
first created the sun by baking a clay pot until it or meditation
*buddha.*

was white hot and coiling a band of copper **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 500 BC to around it eight times. He created the moon in present.

similar fashion but used brass. Black people **SYNONYMS** Kharmaheruka.

were created from sunlight and white from **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
pan-Asiatic.

moonlight. Later, having circumcised the **ART REFERENCES** metal and
stone sculptures, earth goddess, whose clitoris was an anthill, he
paintings.

impregnated her and produced the first crea-LITERARY SOURCES
*Sadhanamala* and Tantric ture, a jackal. Next he fertilized her with
rain to ritual texts.

engender plant life and finally became the father of mankind.

One of five mystic spiritual counterparts of a human *buddha* in
Vajrayana Buddhism. A product of the ADIBUDDHA who represents the branch
of **Ammavaru**

the cosmos concerned with consciousness. He Primordial mother goddess.
Hindu-Dravidian.

originates from the green mantra HUM and lives Known locally from east
central India and wor-in the northern paradise. His SAKTI is ARYA-TARA
shiped by the Dravidian tribe of Telugu. She is and he is normally
accompanied by two GARUDAS

said to have generated the cosmic egg in the sea or dwarfs. Color:
green. Attributes: staff and of milk from which the major gods BRAHMA,
sometimes seven-headed snake. Amoghasiddhi is VISŇU and SˇIVA were born.

also taken as a tutelary deity in Lamaism \[Tibet\]

[]{#index_split_000.html#p32}**AMUN** 17

in which case his attributes include bell, three **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts from the end monkish robes and prayer wheel. Emanations of
Dynasty V (2494-2345 BC); temple hymns; include Visvapani and many other
minor names.

the *Book of the Dead;* the Great Harris Papyrus; *See also* AKSOBHYA,
AMITABHA, RATNASAMB-many other textual references.

HAVA and VAIROCANA.

Amun is a sun god, lord of the sky and king of the Egyptian world. He is
perceived as a primeval **Amor**

deity present in chaos at the creation of the cos-God of love. Roman.
Developed from the Greek mos and is therefore also one of the eight
deities god EROS. Depicted as a winged youth. According of the OGDOAD
coupled with the goddess to tradition he awoke the goddess Psyche with a
AMAUNET and representing hidden power. He is kiss. Attributes include
arrows, bow and torch. The portrayed as a pharaoh, with blue skin and
wear-popular epithet Cupid was only applied by poets.

ing a *modius* (turban) surmounted by two tall plumes of feathers
symbolic of dominance over both Upper and Lower Egypt. In addition to
the **Amphion**

major temples at Luxor, further sanctuaries were God. Greek. Theban
variant on the god POLY-built beyond the first Nile cataract at Amada,
DEUKES.

Soleb, Gebel Barkal and Abu Simbel.

Amun is symbolized chiefly by a ram with curved horns. The Nile goose is
also sacred to **Amphitrite**

him. He is a god regarded as hidden but spread-Sea goddess. Greek.
According to *Theogony* (Hes-ing throughout the cosmos, unseen but
every-iod), one of the fifty daughters of NEREUS and where. Though
depicted anthropomorphically, in DORIS. Considered to calm stormy seas,
traveling temple hymns other deities describe him as "hidin a boat made
of mussels. She was among those den of aspect, mysterious of form." In
the New present at the birth of APOLLO.

Kingdom, from the middle of the sixteenth century BC onward, Amun was
drawn as a manifestation of the ancient sun god of Heliopolis, which
**AMUN** *(the hidden one)* effectively raised his prestige still
further and **ORIGIN** Egypt. Supreme creator god.

earned him the title "king of the gods." He was **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** probably pre-also regarded as being the father of each
pharaoh.

Dynastic but historically circa 2400 BC to end of At Thebes he was
revered as a snake deity with Egyptian period (circa AD 400).

attendant connotations of immortality and end-SYNONYMS Amun kem-atef
(snake god); Amun less renewal. As a member of the Ogdoad he has kamutef
(fertility god).

the head of a snake.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Thebes (Luxor)---Great Amun's ithyphallic form
probably came from Temple of Amun at Karnak; Luxor Temple the notion
that because he was "first formed" of south of Karnak dedicated to the
ithyphallic the gods, he could not have a father and therefore form of
Amun kamutef.

had to impregnate his own mother. He is gener-ART REFERENCES many
portraits on temple walls, ally regarded as a god with great sexual
attributes.

etc; reliefs; statues; obelisks including notably The Temple of Queen
Hatsepsut at Deir el-that of Queen Hatshepsut; stelae.

Bahari bears a relief of her mother impregnated

[]{#index_split_000.html#p33}18 **Amurru**

by Amun. A similar scene exists in the Temple of calendar and is
arguably first represented in Amenhotep III at Luxor. The Great Hall of
bovine form having been derived from the old Hypostyle is filled with
wall paintings of Amun herders' pantheon. He is identified in some texts
and the pharaoh, and contains several proces-as the "bull of heaven."
According to legends, sions honoring Amun. By the twelfth century BC

heaven and earth were once inseparable until An the Amun priesthood was
a powerful force in and Ki bore a son, ENLIL, god of the air, who Egypt,
leading to the eventual contest between cleaved heaven and earth in two.
An carried away Amun and ATEN, the god "created" by Amen-heaven. Ki, in
company with Enlil, took the earth.

hotep IV. Amun's eclipse was short-lived and he An is also paired with
the goddess NAMMU by returned to prominence until the end of Egypt-whom
he fathered ENKI. Patron god of Unug ian history.

(Erech in the *Vetus Testamentum*) *,* An is always a remote shadowy
figure who occasionally lends a hand to tilt the balance of fate but
otherwise tends **Amurru**

to be out of touch with the day-to-day affairs of Mountain god. Western
Semitic. A minor consort heaven and earth.

of ATHIRAT whose attributes include a shepherd's His main sanctuary is
the Eanna temple. After crook and who was probably worshiped by the
Semitic takeover of Sumer by Sargon the herders. Known mainly from
inscriptions. Also Great circa 2500 BC, Enlil supersedes him as MARTU.

supreme national god of the Sumerian city states.

**AN (1)** *(sky)*

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian

(Sumerian) \[Iraq\].

**An (2)**

Supreme creator god.

Possibly a female principle of the creator god AN.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC to Mesopotamian (Sumerian).
Early iconography 2000 BC but continuing as Babylonian creator suggests
a celestial sky goddess in the form of a god (see Anu) until 100 BC or
later.

cow whose udders produce rain and who becomes **SYNONYMS** ANU
(Akkadian).

ANTU(m) in the Akkadian pantheon.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Unug \[modern Warka\].

**ART REFERENCES** none known but probably represented symbolically on
seals and seal impres-Anaitis

sions from third millennium onward.

Fertility goddess. Persian \[Iran\]. Her influence **LITERARY SOURCES**
cuneiform texts including extended through eastern Europe. In
pre-Chris-Sumerian creation accounts, and the Babylon-tian Armenia, the
center of her cult was at ian epic *Enuma Elisˇ.*

Acilisena where noble families regularly surren-dered their daughters to
service as cultic prosti-In Sumerian creation mythology An is the tutes.

supreme being and, with his chthonic female principle, KI, is the
founder of the cosmos. Also, in some texts, identified as the son of
ANSˇAR and **Anala** *(fire)*

KISˇAR. The head of the older generation of gods.

Attendant god. Hindu (Puranic). One of a group He is believed to have
formed the basis for the of eight Vasu deities answering to the god
INDRA.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p34}**Anaulikutsai'x** 19

**Ananke**

with breasts and vaginal area prominent. Often Goddess of destiny.
Greek. Considered to be a she wears a coiffure similar to that of the
Egypt-universal presence. Depicted holding a spindle.

ian goddess HATHOR, with whom at times she has been closely linked. Anat
is described variously as "mother of the gods" and "mistress of
**Ananta**

the sky." In addition to her fertility role, she is a Snake god. Hindu
(Puranic). One of a group of youthful and aggressive goddess of war, a
capac-seven snake deities or MAHANAGAS.

ity in which she was adopted by Egypt from the end of the Middle Kingdom
(early eighteenth century BC) and particularly through the Hyksos
**Anantamukhi**

*(with the face of Ananta)*

Dynasty when she was prominent in Lower Deification of literature.
Buddhist. One of a Egypt. A sanctuary was dedicated to her at Tanis
group of twelve DHARANIS. Color: green. Attrib-and she was identified as
a daughter of the sun utes: staff and water jar with treasure.

god RE with warlike attributes of lance, battle-ax and shield. She
impressed Rameses II whose daughter was called Bin-Anat (daughter of
**Anantesa**

Anat). Rameses III adopted her as his "shield" in Minor deity. Hindu
(Puranic). One of a group of battle.

eight emancipated "lords of knowledge" or The Ras Sˇamra stele describes
her as "Antit, VIDYESVARAS considered to be aspects of SˇIVA.

queen of heaven and mistress of all the gods."

Known as the "virgin Anat," she indulged in orgies of violence "wading
up to her thighs in **ANAT**

blood and gore." She may be one of a triad of **ORIGIN** Canaanite and
Phoenician \[northern goddesses with ATHIRAT and Asěra. In the classic
Israel, Lebanon and Syria\]. Fertility and war Canaanite confrontation
legend, after the pri-goddess.

mordial battle between good and evil in the guise **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** From prehistoric of Baal and MOT, Anat searched out the body
of times (circa 2500 BC) until AD 200 or later.

Baal. She buried it and caught up with his slayer, **SYNONYMS** Anath;
Lady of the Mountain; Antit Mot, to take appropriate retribution. She
cleaved (Egyptian).

and winnowed, burned and ground Mot in a curi-CENTER(S) OF CULT Ugarit
\[Ras Sˇamra\] and genous variation of a common theme associated
else-erally in places down the corn-growing coastal where with gods of
vegetation (see OSIRIS). She regions of the eastern Mediterranean.

also features in the *Legend of Aqhat*, in which she **ART REFERENCES**
named specifically in Egyptian sends an eagle to slay the youth when he
refuses hieroglyphic on a stele from Bethsan; described to give her his
magical bow.

on various other votive inscriptions, clay plaques etc.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Ugaritic texts from Ras **Anaulikutsai'x**

Sˇamra; various offering lists.

River goddess. Bella Coola Indian \[British Columbia, Canada\]. Said to
oversee the arrival The sister of BAAL, Anat is primarily a fertility
and departure of the salmon in the rivers. She goddess. In art she is
usually depicted naked, lives in a cave called Nuskesiu'tsta.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p35}20 **Anbay**

**Anbay**

Roman writer Dio Cassius. The name may also be Local tutelary god.
Pre-Islamic southern Arabian.

linked to the goddess Andarta. Also Adrastea.

Regarded as a god of justice and an oracular source attending the moon
god AMM.

**Anextiomarus**

Local tribal deity. Romano-Celtic (British). God **Ancamna**

of uncertain affinities but linked with APOLLO.

Water goddess. Romano-Celtic (Continental European). Known only from
inscriptions at Trier.

**Angru Mainyu** *(evil spirit)* Chthonic underworld god of darkness.
Persian

\[Iran\]. The original Zoroastrian name of the chief **Andarta**

antagonist of AHURA MAZDA.

Fertility goddess (probable). Celtic (Gallic).

*See also* AHRIMAN.

Patron goddess of the Vocontii tribe. Her name seems to have derived
either from *artos* (bear) or *ar* (ploughed land).

**Anhouri**

*See also* ANDRASTA.

Minor god. Egyptian. A deity whose mummy was allegedly kept at Tanis.

**Andjety**

Chthonic underworld god. Egyptian (Lower).

**Ani**

Minor deity in anthropomorphic form known Sky god. Etruscan. Identified
as residing in the from the Pyramid Texts. Identified with the highest
heaven and sometimes depicted with two ninth nome (district).
Responsible for rebirth in faces, equating possibly with the Roman god
the afterlife and regarded as a consort of several JANUS.

fertility goddesses. He was revered at Busiris where he clearly heralded
the cult of Osiris.

Attributes: high conical crown (similar to the **Anila** *(wind)*

*atef* crown of Osiris) decorated with two tall Attendant god. Hindu
(Puranic). One of a group plumes, crook and flail. In early Pyramid
Texts, of eight VASU deities answering to the god INDRA.

the feathers are replaced by a bicornuate uterus.

*See also* Osiris.

**Anjea**

Animistic fertility spirit. Australasia. Known to **Andrasta**

tribesmen on the Pennefather River, Queensland, Goddess of war.
Romano-Celtic (British). The Australia and believed to place mud babies
in the patron goddess of the Iceni tribe. The warrior wombs of pregnant
women. The grandmother of queen Boudicca is reported to have prayed to
her a newly born infant buried the afterbirth, which before battle and
she was the recipient of human was collected by Anjea and kept in a
hollow tree sacrifice. Andrasta does not appear in Celtic Gaul, or some
such sanctuary until the time came to though a deity called Andraste is
mentioned by the instill it into another child in the womb.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p36}**Anu (1)** 21

**Ankalamman**

KISˇAR) of LAHMU and LAHAMU, and who in turn Guardian goddess.
Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil).

created ANU. Ansˇar is linked with heaven while Known particularly in
southern India where she Kisˇar is identified with earth.

wards off demons. Alternatively she is an aspect of KALI.

**Anti**

Guardian deity. Egyptian (Upper). Seems to have **Anna Kuari**

become assimilated with HORUS and was one of Local vegetation goddess.
Indian. Worshiped by the protectors of the eastern sky in which the sun
the Oraon tribe of Chota Nagpur. The recipient rises. According to some
texts he is also responsi-of human sacrifice in the spring months, she
was ble for the decapitation of the goddess HATHOR in believed to endow
riches on the sacrificer and to a conflict for the throne of Egypt. Anti
is known ensure plentiful harvest while living in his house from Middle
Kingdom coffin texts (circa 2000 BC).

in the form of a child.

Depicted as a falcon, or a human with a falcon's head, standing on a
crescent-shaped barque.

**Anna Perenna**

Protective goddess. Roman. Allegedly she saved the **ANTU**

plebeians from famine in their conflict with the **ORIGIN** Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian) patricians in ancient Roman mythology. An open-

\[Iraq\]. Creator goddess.

air festival dedicated to her was held on March 15

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 2000 BC, but each year in a grove
lying to the north of Rome.

evolving from prehistory, to circa 200 BC.

**SYNONYMS** Antum; ANUNITU.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Uruk and Babylon.

**Annamurti**

**ART REFERENCES** glyptics, stone carvings, etc.

`</i>`{=html}

*Form of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Puranic). The **LITERARY SOURCES**
Babylonian creation epic patron deity of kitchens and food. A shrine at
Sri-Enuma Elisˇ* and documents relating to the *akitu* rangam in
southern India contains two-armed festival.

bronze images of the god. Attributes: a ball of rice in one hand, and in
the other a container of Antu is a Babylonian goddess derived from the
*payasa* (sweetened milk and rice).

older Sumerian KI, though the cosmogony has been altered to suit a
separate tradition. The consort of the god of heaven, ANU, she was a
domi-Ansa

nant feature of the Babylonian *akitu* festival until Minor sun god.
Hindu (Puranic). One of six as recently as 200 BC, her later
pre-eminence pos-ADITYA descendants of ADITI.

sibly attributable to identification with the Greek goddess HERA.

**Ansˇar**

Primordial deity. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Anu (1)

Akkadian). Mentioned in the Babylonian creation Creator god.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-epic *Enuma Elisˇ* as one of a pair of
offspring (with Akkadian). Consort of ANTU(m). Derived from

[]{#index_split_000.html#p37}22 **Anu (2)**

the older Sumerian god AN. Anu features strongly vation of bodies being
scavenged from shallow in the *akitu* festival in Babylon, Uruk and
other graves and the desire to protect them from such cities until the
Hellenic period and possibly as a fate by manifesting Anubis as a dog
himself.

late as 200 BC. Some of his later pre-eminence The *Book of the Dead*
has him standing by the may be attributable to identification with the
scales in which the heart is weighed in the Hall of Greek god of heaven,
ZEUS, and with OURANOS.

the Two Truths, and he is sometimes known as the "claimer of hearts."
Anubis was perceived to superintend the embalming of kings and courtiers
**Anu (2)**

in the mortuary and the subsequent binding with Chthonic mother goddess.
Celtic (Irish). Closely linen bandages. His coat color is thought to be
associated with fertility and the primordial black because of the color
of the corpse after the mother of the TUATHA DE DANANN. Twin hills
embalming process, which darkened it, and the near Killarney in Munster
are called "The Paps of use of black tar to seal the bindings. His
symbol Anu." Also Ana.

in the context of mortuary god is an animal skin, headless, dripping
blood and tied to a pole. At the subsequent funeral ceremony of the
Opening **ANUBIS** *\[Greek\]*

of the Mouth the priest wore a jackal headdress.

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Mortuary god.

The main cemetery sites are on the west bank of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 2700 BC (but the Nile where the sun sets, hence one
epithet for extending from pre-Dynastic times) until end Anubis---"chief
of the westerners"; another, "he of Egyptian history circa AD 400.

who is upon the mountain," conjures an image of **SYNONYMS** Imy-ut (he
who is in the mortuary); Anubis watching over the cemeteries from the
Khenty-imentiu (chief of the westerners); high escarpments.

Khenty-seh-netjer (chief of the gods' pavilion); In the Greco-Roman
period he became a cos-Neb-ta-djeser (lord of the sacred land); Tepy-mic
deity of earth and sky somewhat removed dju-ef (he who is upon the
mountain).

from his older function.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** the necropolis at Memphis and elsewhere.

**ART REFERENCES** tomb effigies, wall paintings, **Anukis**

*\[Greek\]*

statuettes etc.

Birth goddess. Egyptian (Upper). Minor deity **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts; funerary texts with cult centers in lower Nubia and at
Elephan-and hymns.

tine. She is variously the daughter of RE, and of KHNUM and SATIS.
Anukis lives in the cataracts of The parentage of Anubis is confused but
the most the Lower Nile. Her portrait appears in the Tem-popular notion
seems to place him as a son of RE

ple of Rameses II at Beit-et-Wali where she suck-and of NEPHTHYS or
ISIS. The god of mortuaries, les the pharaoh, suggesting that she is
connected Anubis takes the form of a black dog or jackal with birth and
midwifery, but she also demon-usually in a lying down or crouching
position, strates a malignant aspect as a strangler (see ears pricked
and long tail hanging. He wears a HATHOR). Her sacred animal is the
gazelle.

collar with magical connotations. Less often he Depicted
anthropomorphically wearing a turban appears in human form with a canine
head. The (modius) with ostrich feathers. Also Anuket imagery of a dog
probably originated from obser-

(Egyptian).

[]{#index_split_000.html#p38}**Aparajita** 23

**Anu-Mate**

sends the sun each morning, roars with the thun-God of space.
Polynesian. One of the sons of der which heralds his storms and is the
creator of RANGINUI by Pokoharua, the sister of TANGAROA, the earth.

the sea god. He belongs to a group of deities engendered at the time of
creation that includes ANU-MATE, Anu-Matao, Anu-Whakarere and **Apa**

Anu-Whakatoro, all of whom rule over different Attendant god. Hindu
(Puranic). One of a group aspects of space above the upper world. Anu-of
eight VASU deities answering to the god INDRA.

Mate is perceived as the god responsible for the Attributes: hook and
plough.

"space of cold death" and in fact all of the group are envisaged as
deities ruling over realms of great cold.

**Apacita**

Guardian spirit. Inca (pre-Columbian South America) \[Peru, etc\]. The
apotheosis of a pile of **Anunitu**

stones marking the top of a pass or some other Mother goddess.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-critical point on a route invoked by travelers
Akkadian).

with small offerings to strengthen them on their *See also* ANTU.

journey.

**Anunnaki**

**Apam Napat** *(grandchild of the water)* Children and courtiers of the
god of heaven.

1\. God of fresh water. Persian \[Iran\]. He provides Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akka-water in arid regions and suppresses
rebellions.

dian). Known from at least 2500 BC until circa 200

2\. God of fresh water. Hindu (Vedic). Mentioned BC (in Babylon). The
Anunnaki originate as in the *Rg Veda,* he is described as "golden in
chthonic fertility deities but later feature as the appearance."

seven fearsome judges of the underworld who answer to Kur and ERESˇKIGAL
and who are responsible for passing sentences of death includ-Apap

ing that placed on the goddess INANA. They are Creator god. Teso
\[Uganda, East Africa\].

often closely identified with the IGIGI.

Regarded as a benevolent sky god who brings the rain to parched land.
Also Akuj.

**Anuradha**

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Puranic). A **Aparajita**
*(unconquered)* benevolent *NAKSATRA* or astral deity, daughter of 1.
God. Hindu (Puranic). One of the eleven DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

EKADASARUDRAS or forms of RUDRA. Attributes: bell, bowl, club, drum,
hook, lance, lotus, prayer wheel, rod, rosary, shield, sword and
trident.

**Aondo**

2\. Minor god. Buddhist (Mahayana).

Creator god. Tiv \[central Nigeria, West Africa\].

3\. Goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Form of DURGA.

An abstract principle who lives in the sky. He Her attendant animal is a
lion. Attributes:

[]{#index_split_000.html#p39}24 **Apedemak**

arrow, shield, snake and sword. 4. Goddess.

Aphrodite is one of the major goddesses of the Buddhist (Mahayana). She
stands or treads Greek Homeric pantheon, according to legend on the god
GANESA. Color: yellow. Attributes: born as a cosmic deity from the foam
of the ocean bell, hook, image of RATNASAMBHAVA, noose after her father
OURANOS was castrated by KRO-and staff.

NOS and his genitals were hurled into the sea. In other accounts she is
of a "younger" generation, a daughter of ZEUS. She is the consort of
HEP-Apedemak

HAISTOS and occasional mistress of other deities, War god. Sudanese
(Meroe). An Egyptianized including ARES. Through liaison with the
herds-deity, his main sanctuary was contained in a vast man Anchises she
bore Aeneas who is said to have religious complex and center of
pilgrimage at carried his father to safety on his back during the
Musawwarat-es-Sufra, north of the sixth Nile sack of Troy. Her sacred
animal is the goat.

cataract. Sacred animals include cattle and the Aphrodite seems clearly
to have evolved from the African elephant. Depicted with the head of a
lion Phoenician or Mesopotamian model of a goddess and a human body,
holding a scepter embellished of love and one of her strongest early
cults was on with a seated lion at the tip.

the island of Cyprus. Her name derives from the Greek word for the
sexual act. She is perceived, in some contexts, as being androgynous and
even **Aphrodisias**

bearded (see also ARTEMIS). As with her Meso-Fertility goddess. Carian
\[southwestern Turkey\].

potamian predecessors she is a goddess of war Equating with the Greek
goddess APHRODITE.

and victory. Immediate predecessors to the Hellenic model seem to be
present in the Mycenaean period particularly at the Kition sanctuary.
The **APHRODITE** *(foam-born)* Paphos sanctuary definitely suggests
Phoenician **ORIGIN** Greek and Cypriot. Goddess of sexual inspiration.
In the *Iliad,* Aphrodite rescues Paris love.

from his fight with Menelaus and returns him to **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** identified from the arms of HELEN in Troy.

circa 1300 BC (evolving from an earlier prehis-In Hellenic art Aphrodite
is particularly drawn toric Asiatic model), until Christianization
wearing fine clothes and jewelry. She possesses a (circa AD 400) and
later.

girdle with magical properties. The famed statue of **SYNONYMS**
equating with ISŤAR (Akkadian); the goddess from Cnidos (circa 340 BC),
depicting ASTARTE (Syrian); ASŤORETH (Phoenician); her naked, is the
first of many such erotic inter-Dione, Cytherea, VENUS (Roman).

pretations. The temple at Paphos once dispensed **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Paphos, Amathus and Kition model phalli and lumps of salt to cultic
pilgrims, (Cyprus), Corinth and elsewhere on Greek and the Corinthian
sanctuary enjoyed, according mainland.

to Strabo, more than a thousand cultic prostitutes.

**ART**

**REFERENCES** Bronze

Age statuettes

(Cyprus); votive stelae; the Parthenon frieze and other contemporary
sculpture.

**Apis**

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Iliad* and *Odyssey* (Homer); Bull god. Egyptian.
The living personification of *Theogony* and *Hymn to Aphrodite*
(Hesiod); tem-the creator god PTAH in Memphis, he acts as an ple hymns,
particularly *Hymn of Sappho.*

intermediary between the supreme god and

[]{#index_split_000.html#p40}**APOLLO** 25

mankind. His mother is ISIS, who engendered **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Delos,
Pylo-Delphi and him in a lightning flash. The bull is depicted as many
other sanctuaries throughout the Greek wholly black apart from a small
white triangle on world.

the forehead, and it bears vulture wings. Between **ART REFERENCES** the
Parthenon frieze; the its horns are surmounted the sun disc (or, in
later Belvedere Apollo triumphing over the Python; times, the moon) and
the uraeus (snake symbol).

Apollo and DAPHNE; a famed but lost statue The cult of the bull is very
ancient and is from Delos; Apollo holding the three Charites attested in
Egypt from at least 3000 BC. Accordin his right hand; other contemporary
sculpture ing to the Greek writer Herodotus, huge statues and painting.

of Apis supported the temple of Ptah in Memphis.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Iliad* and *Odyssey* (Homer); In a ritual of
virility, the king paced alongside the *Theogony* and *Hymn to Apollo*
(Hesiod); various charging bull to renew his strength. The average other
temple hymns.

life of an Apis bull was fourteen years, at the end of which each was
mummified and interred in One of the major Greek deities always
perceived as huge sarcophagi, which were placed in catacombs a god who
epitomizes youthful masculinity, possi-at the necropolis at Seqqara. The
bull also has bly with early links to Lycia in Asia Minor (Hittite)
strong underworld connections.

and to Minoan Crete. Generally a distant rather *See also* SARAPIS.

than an intimate and approachable god. His mother is LETO who wandered
the world in great suffering until she chanced on the island of Delos
**Aplu**

where she found refuge, and Apollo is often por-Weather god. Etruscan.
No cult is identifiably trayed as part of a triad with Leto and ARTEMIS.
He addressed to this deity. He is depicted partly epitomizes the
transition between adolescence and cloaked and wearing a laurel leaf,
but otherwise manhood in Greek male society. At Delphi his naked.
Attributes include a staff and laurel twig.

sanctuary is central to the complex. At Delos it appears secondary to
that of Artemis. The paean dance of healing which is particularly known
from **Apo** *(lord)*

the Hyakinthia festival at Amyklai (Sparta) is closely Mountain god.
Inca (pre-Columbian South identified with the Apollo cult. Not only is
he a god America) \[Peru, etc\]. The apotheosis of an of healing but
also of pestilence. He is the father of Andean mountain, all mountains
being sacred to ASKLEPIOS, the god of healing, and he is continu-the
South American Indians.

ally associated with purification rites and oracles.

Generally Apollo is drawn as a god of hunters carrying a bow and arrow
and associated with a stag **APOLLO**

or roe. He is also pictured with lions. He became, **ORIGIN** Greek and
possibly cultures in Asia improbably, the patron god of poets and leader
of Minor. God of hunting and healing.

the Muses (daughters of ZEUS). Literature often **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1300 BC and presents Apollo in a dual aspect of fearsome
hunter earlier until Christianization (circa AD 400) and and gracious
player of the lyre. In the former capac-probably later.

ity he was at times merciless, killing the many chil-SYNONYMS Apellon
(pre-Homeric); Atepomarus dren of Niobe who had boasted of them to the
(Celtic).

chagrin of Leto. He fought and slew the Delphic

[]{#index_split_000.html#p41}26 **Apsaras**

python and the Olympic Cyclopes, but in both **Aralo**

cases himself became subject to general laws of Local god of
agriculture. Pre-Christian Geor-morality and suffered temporary
banishment.

gian. Probably derived from the Armenian god Apollo is strongly
associated with the mystical num-ARAY.

ber seven (almost certainly a Mesopotamian concept). In Ugaritic
inscriptions he is referred to as RESĚP of the Arrow (see Resěp). Apollo
was widely **Aranyani**

revered under various local synonyms by the Celts.

Minor goddess of woodlands. Hindu (Vedic).

Possibly having evolved from a primitive animistic guardian spirit of
animals, Aranyani is an **Apsaras**

elusive, rarely seen, deity who is recognized in Water spirits. Hindu
(Vedic). Identified as musi-the sounds of the trees, particularly at
dusk. She cians and protective deities of gamblers bringing is a benign
figure, sweet-scented and unwilling to good fortune. They may also bring
insanity.

destroy unless severely provoked.

**Apsu**

**Arapacana**

God of underground primeval waters. Mesopo-God. Buddhist. A BODHISATTVA
or spiritual tamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). Derived from the meditation
*buddha.* Originally a DHARANI of Sumerian ABZU. In the Babylonian
creation epic MANJUSRI who became deified. Accompanied by *Enuma Elisˇ,*
Apsu is killed, while sleeping, by four minor deities. Also a collective
name for the ENKI, who establishes his own abode above the five
*buddhas.* Color: yellow or red. Attributes: deeps. Apsu's death
triggered the cosmic challenge standing wearing a monkish garment and
carry-between the forces of MARDUK and TIAMAT.

ing book and sword.

**Aquilo**

**Arawa**

Weather god. Roman. God of the west winds.

Moon goddess. Suk and Pokot \[Kenya and Uganda, East Africa\]. The two
tribes share the same pantheon of deities. Arawa is the daughter of
**A'ra**

the creator god TORORUT and his consort SETA.

Local tutelary god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

Known from inscriptions at Bostra \[near Damascus\]. The name implies an
altar or holy place, but **Arawn**

its Arabic root also means to dye, suggesting that Chthonic underworld
god. Celtic (Welsh). The the altars were stained with the blood of
sacrifices, leader of the phantom hunt seen chasing a white probably
children.

stag with a pack of red-eared hounds. He equates with GWYNN AP NUDD, a
similar deity known in South Wales. His chief underworld **Arachne**

opponent is Hafgan and he bribes PWYLL, Minor goddess. Roman. Concerned
with the craft prince of Dyfed, to challenge Hafgan in of weaving.

exchange for a gift of pigs.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p42}**Areimanios** 27

**Aray**

**Ardhanari(svara)**

*(the lord being half*

War god. Pre-Christian Armenian. Probably *woman)*

derived locally from the Greek ARES. Some God. Hindu (Puranic). The god
SˇIVA combined traditions suggests that he was also a dying-and-with his
SAKTI as a single being. His attendant rising god.

animal is the bull. In iconography the left side of the image is female
and the right male. A tutelary deity of eunuchs in India. Attributes:
(right side) **ARCHON(S)**

*(rulers)*

blue lotus, cup, hatchet, lute, moon disc, pestle, **ORIGIN** Gnostic
Christian (eastern Mediter-skin, sword and trident; (left side) ax,
mirror, ranean\]. Primordial creator gods.

noose, pitcher, rosary, sacred rope and trident.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 100 to May appear as three-headed.
Also Ammaiappan AD 400 and probably persisting later.

(Tamil); Naranari.

**SYNONYMS** eksousiai (authorities, Greek).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** undefined cells within the area of early Christian
influence.

**Ardra**

**ART REFERENCES** none.

Minor goddess of misfortune. Hindu (Puranic). A **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Nag Hammadi* codices.

malevolent *NAKSATRA* or astral deity; daughter of DAKSA and wife of
CANDRA (SOMA).

The Archons are the primordial celestial rulers of the cosmos. The
Gnostic cosmogony argues that the God of Israel was not the original or
sole **Arduinna**

creator but was a product of other older tyranni-Goddess of forests and
hunting. Romano-Celtic cal forces who were eventually defeated in the
(Continental European). Known only from conflict of light and dark. The
Archons are the inscriptions and figurines in the Ardennes original
creators of mortal man, though in the region. Depicted riding on the
back of a wild form in which they contrived him, he did not boar and
presumed to be a guardian deity possess a soul. The main literary texts
include of boars. Identified by the Romans with the the *Hypostasis of
the Archons,* and the treatise on goddess DIANA.

*The Origin of the World,* both forming part of the *Nag Hammadi*
collection written down during the third or fourth century AD and
probably **Arebati**

owing much to Greek philosophy. The material Creator god. Bambuti
\[Congo, West Africa\].

was banned under the censorship of the early Worshiped by a pigmy tribe
living along the Christian fathers.

banks of the river Ituri. He is considered to have created mankind from
clay and blood, covered with skin.

**Arcismati** *(brilliant)* Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of
several deified BHUMIS recognized as different **Areimanios**

spiritual spheres through which a disciple Chthonic underworld god.
Greek. Probably passes. Color: green. Attributes: blue lotus and derived
from the Persian deity AHRIMAN. Plutarch staff.

identifies him as the embodiment of HADES.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p43}28 **Arensnuphis** **Arensnuphis**
*\[Greek\]*

of human skulls. Another notorious son of Ares Local god of uncertain
affinities. Egyptian was the dragon slain by Kadmos as he sought to
(Nubian). Probably significant circa 700 BC to found the city of Thebes.
Its teeth, which he AD 400 as an attendant of ISIS. He appeared in sowed
in the earth, germinated and sprang up as Egyptian sanctuaries during
the Greco-Roman warriors, the grandsons of Ares, who promptly period and
seems to have been of benevolent turned on each other in mortal combat.
Ares nature. There is also a sanctuary known from entered into a brief
liaison with APHRODITE, the Philae in Greece where he is linked with
Isis.

goddess consort of HEPHAISTOS, and through her Depicted in
anthropomorphic form wearing a fathered a daughter, HARMONIA, whom
Kadmos plumed crown or in the form of a lion. Also later married, thus
paving the way to establish Ari-hes-nefer (Egyptian).

Thebes in an atmosphere of peace and harmony.

**ARES** *(throng of war)* **Ariadne**

Goddess of vegetation. Greek. Possibly derived **ORIGIN** Greek. God of
War.

from an unnamed Minoan goddess identified on **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 800 BC, but probably from earlier times, until Christianiza-Crete.
According to Homer and Hesiod she is a tion (circa

daughter of M

AD 400).

INOS and a consort of DIONYSOS.

Her crown, given by Z

**SYNONYMS** none.

EUS, is the Corona Borealis.

Tradition has it that she was wooed and then **CENTER(S) OF CULT** no
sanctuaries known until Roman times, when a temple was dedicated in
deserted by the hero Theseus.

the Agora in Athens.

**ART REFERENCES** the Parthenon frieze; a cele-Arianrhod

brated statue by Alkamenes; other contempo-Chthonic earth goddess.
Celtic (Welsh). Respon-rary sculpture.

sible for initiation of souls in the otherworld **LITERARY SOURCES**
chiefly *Iliad* (Homer) and in the tower of Caer Sidi. Mentioned in the
*Theogony* (Hesiod).

*Mabinogion* texts as the possible daughter of Beli, consort of DON and
mother of LLEW LLAW

Ares is a lesser known member of the Olympic pan-GYFFES and Dylan.

theon of great gods, the son of ZEUS and HERA, who allegedly lived in
Thrace. As a warrior god he is contrasted with the more prominent and
**Arimanius**

successful goddess ATHENA who fought and Chthonic underworld god. Roman.

vanquished him in a war between the gods.

*See also* AREIMANIOS.

Although Athena stands for victory in battle through glory and honor,
Ares epitomizes the evil and more brutal aspects of warfare. In the eyes
of **Arinna**

*(sun goddess)*

Zeus he is "the most hateful of gods." His war char-Solar deity. Hittite
and Hurrian. May have taken iot is pulled by Phobos (fear) and Deimos
(terror).

androgynous form, but also identified as the con-Ares' sons were even
more barbaric than he.

sort of the weather god TESˇUB. Probably the head Kyknos was a ferocious
killer who, until slain by of the Hittite state pantheon. There is
little detail HERAKLES, was proposing a temple constructed because the
religious center of Arinna is known

[]{#index_split_000.html#p44}**Arsay** 29

only from texts. The sun goddess was also per-Arnemetia

ceived to be a paramount chthonic or earth god-Water goddess.
Romano-Celtic (British). A deity dess. She becomes largely syncretized
with the known only from inscriptions.

Hurrian goddess HEBAT.

**Arom**

**Aristaios**

Minor god of contractual agreements. Kafir God of herdsmen. Greek. The
consort of Auto-

\[Afghanistan\]. Arom appears to have been signif-noe. Of ancient
origin, worshiped by peasants as icant only to a tribe known as the Kam
in the a guardian of herds and beekeepers. The cult con-southern
Hindukush. He was honored by sacri-tinued for many centuries at Kyrene
\[Libya\].

fice of a male goat on the occasion of a peace treaty, and had seven
brothers.

**Arjuna** *(silvery)*

Heroic god. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic).

Arjuna appears in the *Mahabharata* epic. One of **ARSAN DUOLAI**
*(terrible dweller of the* the princely sons of the mythical Pandu
family, *underground world)*

his father is I

**ORIGIN** Yakut \[eastern Siberia\]. Chief spirit of NDRA. He generally
appears with the warrior god B

the underworld.

HIMA. Allegedly responsible for requesting V

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times ISŇU to take his VISVARUPA
form but also identified as a minor incarnation or *avatara* of until
circa AD 1900.

Visňu. Attributes: usually depicted bearing a bow **SYNONYMS** none.

received from A

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none.

GNI the fire god, but may also appear carrying a sword and shield. Also
N

**ART REFERENCES** none positively identified ARA.

though possibly the subject of wooden icons.

**Arma**

**LITERARY SOURCES** *The Yakut* (Jochelson).

Minor moon god. Hittite and Hurrian. Depicted winged and wearing a
sickle moon surmounted Little is known of this animistic god, though he
on a horned helmet.

was considered to live in the lower world and rule over a nebulous group
of spirits, the Abasy. To these subterranean deities horned cattle were
**Armaz**

slaughtered. Abasy also lived in the upper world, Supreme god.
Pre-Christian Georgian. Depicted in which capacity they were recipients
of horse as a warrior deity clad in golden armor, wearing sacrifice.

jewels and wielding a sword.

**Arsay**

**Arnakua'gsak**

Chthonic underworld goddess. Western Semitic Animistic spirit. Inuit
(North American). The (Canaanite). According to epic creation texts, she

"Old Woman of the Sea" who supplies all is the third daughter of BAAL at
Ugarit (Ras the physical needs of the Eskimo from the ocean.

Sˇamra), possibly also equating with ALLATUM.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p45}30 **Arsu**

**Arsu**

procession on May 25 among a congregation of Astraltutelary god.
Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

up to 30,000.

Locally worshiped at Palmyra where he personi-To the Greeks she was the
daughter of ZEUS

fies the evening star, in company with his brother and LETO. She was
honored in the sanctuary AZIZOS who is the morning star. He equates with
on Delos with its celebrated Horn Altar from Ruda elsewhere in northern
Arabia. Associated circa 700 BC. In Greek mythology the androgy-in
Palmyra with horses or camels.

nous aspect was firmly discounted. In her earliest pre-Homeric form the
Mistress of Animals

"suckles the young of every wild creature that **ARTEMIS**

roams the fields." As a huntress she uses a bow **ORIGIN** Greek, but
known extensively through and arrows.

western Asia. Principally goddess of animals By Homeric times the
ferocity of this prehis-and hunting, but in Greek-speaking Asia, a toric
element has waned in favor of a more timid mother goddess.

image of a young girl dominated robustly by her **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 800 BC and stepmother HERA. A contrary character study
in earlier until Christianization (circa AD 400) and the *Odyssey*
pictures her more positively as a vir-probably later.

gin goddess chasing and killing boars and hinds **SYNONYMS** Potnia
Theron (mistress of the over the hills and fields, fleet of foot and in
com-animals).

pany with a band of nymphs. She presides over **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Antioch-near-Pisidia; Delos; nature and over the initiation rituals of
young Magnesia-on-the-Maeander; Pamphylia; Perge; girls. She is also a
goddess of blood sacrifice. A Ephesus \[Turkey\].

cruel element emerged in a different sense as she **ART REFERENCES**
cultic statues, etc, most notably threatened any maiden who turned to
the role of the multi-breasted figures at Ephesus.

wife. Paradoxically, and more in keeping with the **LITERARY SOURCES**
cuneiform texts (earlier Asian old Semitic personality, she is also the
goddess of models); *Iliad* (Homer), *Theogony* (Hesiod).

birth.

Artemis is a deity of very ancient origins who survived and attracted
great popularity in both **Arthapratisamvit**

Asia Minor and Greece into Christian times, Goddess of logical analysis.
Buddhist (Vajrayana).

when arguably much of her ethos was trans-One of a group of four. Color:
green. Attributes: ferred to the Virgin Mary. Both figures enjoyed jewel
and noose.

major sanctuaries at Ephesus. As an Asiatic goddess Artemis was often
drawn winged and standing between wild animals. In this context **Artio
of Muri**

she generally appears equipped with boots, a Fertility goddess and
guardian spirit of bears.

torch and a pointed cap. She is also a strongly Romano-Celtic
(Continental European). Known androgynous figure, a feature depicted
dramat-only from inscriptions and sculptures in the ically in the statue
of Artemis of Ephesus. Her Berne region of Switzerland, she is linked
with temple at Ephesus dates from the fourth cen-bears. A bronze depicts
her offering fruit to a tury BC and is ranked among the seven wonders
bear. She seems also to be a goddess of prosper-of the world. The cult
statues were carried in ity and harvest. She became syncretized with the

[]{#index_split_000.html#p46}**ASĚRAH** 31

Roman god Mercury as Mercury Artaios. Also Depicted anthropomorphically,
occasionally Artemis Brauronia.

hawk-headed.

**Arundhati** *(faithfulness)* **Asalluha**

Astral goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Personification Minor god. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Baby-of the morning star and the wife of all risis or
lonian-Akkadian). A son of ENKI who apparently inspired sons of BRAHMA
though particularly asso-acts as a messenger and reporter to his father.

ciated with Vasistha. Attributes: begging bowls.

Linked with rituals of exorcism. Cult center Ku'ara. In Babylonian times
he became largely syncretized with MARDUK.

**Aruru**

Mother goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian)

**Asar**

*See also* NINHURSAG˜A.

Equestrian god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

Known only from inscriptions at Palmyra.

**Arvernus**

Local tribal deity. Celtic (Gallic). God of the **Asase Yaa**

Arverni.

Chthonic fertility goddess. Ashanti \[Ghana, West Africa\]. A major
deity revered over a wide area of Akan- and Fante-speaking Ghana. She
has no **Aryaman** *(companion)*

temples or priests but days (Thursdays) are set Minor sun god. Hindu
(Vedic and Puranic). In aside in her honor and no ploughing is
permitted.

Vedic times, the god of formal hospitality. One of By tradition a farmer
sacrifices a cockerel to her six ADITYA sons of the goddess ADITI.
Attributes: each year to ensure a good harvest, sprinkling the club, two
lotuses and prayer wheel.

blood on the ground. As the womb of the earth, she represents the
goddess of the dead and she is also goddess of truth. Also Asase Efua
(Fante).

**Arya-Tara** *(the honorable Tara)* Goddess. Buddhist. The SAKTI of
AMOGHASIDDHI. Her name is often abbreviated to TARA and **ASĚRAH**

she originates from the TAM bija or seed. Color: **ORIGIN** Amorite,
then Canaanite and possibly green. Attributes: green lotus and staff.
Also Phoenician \[Lebanon from Tyre northwards, VASYA-TARA.

Syria\]. Mother goddess.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from prehistoric times circa third
millennium BC until Chris-Asˇ

tianization (circa AD 400).

Local fertility god. Egyptian (western Sahara).

**SYNONYMS** ATHIRAT.

Known from the Early Dynastic Period. By infer-CENTER(S) OF CULT Ugarit
\[Ras Sˇamra\] and hill ence a benign god of oases and other fertile
areas shrines throughout the corn-growing coastal of the desert.
Epithets include "lord of Libya."

region of the eastern Mediterranean.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p47}32 **Asěrtu**

**ART REFERENCES** none surviving, but once exten-Ashiakle

sively represented.

Goddess of wealth. Gan \[district around Accra, **LITERARY SOURCES**
Ugaritic texts from Ras Ghana, West Africa\]. The daughter of NAI,
Sˇamra, particularly *The Legend of Baal and Anat;* god of the sea, she
was born in the ocean and *Vetus Testamentum.*

came to land in a canoe. Her colors are red and white.

Asěrah is the great mother goddess of Canaan.

Known as "Lady Asěrah of the sea," she seems to have lived close by the
place of IL, the Canaanite **Asira**

creator god, and is said to have had many sons.

Local god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

She is described as the "creatress of the gods" and Mentioned only in
name by the Babylonian the matron of a number of other goddesses who
king Nabonidus, worshiped at Taima and oversee the natural world. She is
also ambiguous influenced strongly by Egyptian culture.

in her attitude to BAAL. She intercedes with Il *See also* SALM.

when Baal wishes to build a palace of his own yet, when he is
vanquished, she attempts to place one of her own offspring on the
throne. It is Asěrah **Asis**

who gave her name to the hill shrines under the Sun god. Suk and Pokot
\[Kenya and Uganda, trees which were vilified by the writers of the
bib-East Africa\]. These two tribes share the lical prophetic books such
as Ezekiel. Translated same pantheon. The younger brother of the as
"grove" in the King James English version, the supreme god of heaven
TORORUT. In Nandi *asěrah* seems to have been a carved wooden pillar

\[Kenya\] religion, Asis becomes the supreme which formed the focal
point of worship in con-creator god.

junction with a stone *massebah*. The asřah represented the presence of
the mother goddess. Its popularity with large numbers of Israelites is
**ASKLEPIOS**

beyond dispute, but because of its pagan conno-ORIGIN Greek. God of
physicians and healing.

tations and particularly its representation of the **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 800 BC or ear-mother goddess linked with rituals of
fertility, the lier to Christianization (circa AD 400).

asěrah became one of the major irritations of the **SYNONYMS**
Asklapios, Aisklapios.

prophets and other religious leaders of the tribes **CENTER(S) OF**

**CULT** Epidauros; Kos; the during the period of the Israelite
kingship. It may Asklepeion in Pergamon.

have stimulated large numbers of rank-and-file **ART REFERENCES**
various sculptures.

to abandon or take a strongly ambivalent attitude **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Iliad* (Homer); *Catalogues* toward Yhwhism.

(Hesiod).

The son of APOLLO and a mortal consort, Coro-Asěrtu

nis, Asklepios lived effectively as a mortal and Fertility goddess.
Western Semitic (Canaanite) died as such. He was nonetheless regarded as
a and Hittite. Identified in Ugaritic (Ras Sˇamra) deity. He was reared
by the centaur Charon and texts as an unfaithful consort of ELKUNIRSA.
Also fathered two sons, Podaleirios and Machaon, Asěrdus (Hittite).

who were also physicians. More familiar from

[]{#index_split_000.html#p48}**Astaphaios** 33

modern usage is his daughter, the goddess **Asopos**

HYGIEIA (health). Asklepios is symbolized by a Local river god. Greek
(Beotian). Known only rod with twin snakes coiled around it. He is also
from regions of central Greece as one of the sons represented in his
sanctuaries by a captive snake.

of POSEIDON.

According to legend he met his death at the hand of ZEUS for presuming
to bring a mortal being back from death. Physicians on Kos **Asˇpalis**

formed into a guild, the Asklepiadai (sons of Hunting goddess. Western
Semitic. There is Asklepios). The Epidauros sanctuary became an scant
mention of Asˇpalis from Melite in Phthia influential place of
pilgrimage by the sick and and she is probably a local version of
ARTEMIS. As infirm in classical times.

in certain Artemis mythology, she hanged herself and her body
disappeared.

**Aslesa(s)**

*(adherence)*

Minor goddess of misfortune. Hindu (Epic **Asřatum**

and Puranic). A malevolent *NAKSATRA* or astral Fertility goddess.
Western Semitic (Canaanite).

deity; daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA Probably a corruption of the
Semitic ATHIRAT or (SOMA).

ASĚRAH. Also mentioned in Babylonian texts from the Hellenistic period.
Also Asřat (Akkadian).

**Asňan**

Vegetation goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian **Assur**

and Babylonian-Akkadian). Minor deity prob-Tutelary god. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akka-ably known to the Sumerians from circa 3500

dian). The national deity of Assyria. In the Assyr-BC or earlier. She is
concerned with the abun-ian copies of the creation epic *Enuma Elisˇ,*
he dance of grain in the fields, sent as its protec-replaces MARDUK as
the hero.

tress by the gods ENLIL and ENKI. According to creation accounts, she
and the cattle god LAHAR

were first intended to serve the needs of the **Astabi**

Annunaki, the celestial children of AN, but Deity. Hittite and Hurrian.
Known only from when the heavenly creatures were found unable
inscriptions.

to make use of their products, humankind was created to provide an
outlet for their services.

Attributes: ears of corn sprouting from her **Astamatara**

shoulders.

Generic term for a group of mother goddesses.

Hindu (Puranic). Eight deities who are varieties of the goddess CAMUNDA,
often malevolent.

**Asokottamasri**

*(the great beauty of Asoka)* Physician god. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Accounted among one of a series of medicine **Astaphaios**

*buddhas* or SMAN-BLA in Lamaism. Typically Primordial deity. Gnostic
Christian. One of the depicted with stretched earlobes. Color: red.

androgynous principles born to YALDABAOTH, the

[]{#index_split_000.html#p49}34 **Astar**

prime parent, ruling the seven heavens of chaos in wears a crown of
cows' horns enclosing a sun disc.

gnostic mythology.

The latter may have rays emanating.

*See also* ASŤORETH, ISŤAR and ASĚRAH.

**Astar**

Astral god. Ethiopian. Identified in Axum Empire **Astlik**

inscriptions from circa AD 200-400.

Astral goddess. Pre-Christian Armenian. Derived from the Mesopotamian
model of ISŤAR. Survived in Christian times as the mother of fairies.

**Asťaroth**

Fertility goddess. Western Semitic. Goddess of sheep herders equating
with the Phoenician god-ASŤORETH

dess ASTARTE. Also a plural form of the name **ORIGIN** Palestinian and
Philistine \[Israel, Asťoreth and used as a collective name for
god-Lebanon\]. Fertility goddess.

desses (cf. BAAL).

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1200 BC or earlier until circa 200 BC.

**SYNONYMS** ASŤAROTH.

**ASTARTE** *(star)*

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Palestine coastal region **ORIGIN** western
Semitic, predominantly Phoeni-including Jerusalem.

cian \[Lebanon and Syria\]. Fertility goddess.

**ART REFERENCES** various sculptures.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from circa 1500 BC

**LITERARY SOURCES** inscriptions; *Vetus Testamen-or earlier until
circa 200 BC.*

*tum.*

**SYNONYMS** Asťarat; Attart (Ugarit).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** predominantly Tyre; also Asťoreth equates with the
Syrian goddess ASTARTE, Sidon, Byblos, Ascalon, Carthage, Kition both
being modeled on the Mesopotamian ISŤAR.

\[Cyprus\], Eryx \[Sicily\] and Malta.

She was adopted, typically, as goddess of both **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures, plaques, votive ste-love and war. She is usually depicted
wearing a lae, glyptics, etc.

horned headdress. Biblical references include I **LITERARY SOURCES**
mainly inscriptions.

Kings 11.5 and II Kings 23.13. Solomon is said to have built a temple in
her honor near Jerusalem.

The goddess of the evening star, of war and of The name is said, by some
authors, to be synony-sexual love. Inscriptions from the fifth century
BC

mous with Asťaroth.

in her major temple at Sidon suggest she was perceived as an emanation
of BAAL SˇAMIN, personifying his divine power. She is also his consort.
Her **Asuha-No-Kami**

animal is the sphinx, which typically appears on God of courtyards.
Shinto \[Japan\]. A guardian either side of her throne. She is often
represented deity, one of many in Shintoism, concerned with by *baetyls*
or stone stelae. In Hellenic times she the protection of houses and
their environs.

became largely syncretized with the Greek goddess APHRODITE. A first
century BC inscription in a sanctuary dedicated to Aphrodite at Delos
iden-Asurakumara

tifies the "holy Syrian goddess." Astarte is typi-God. Jain \[India\].
One of the groups under the cally depicted naked and, in the Egyptian
style, general title of *BHVANAVASI* (dwelling in places).

[]{#index_split_000.html#p50}**Atea** 35

They have a youthful appearance and are associ-rate variations, and at
Khirbet Brak, where she is ated with rain and thunder.

associated with dolphins. She often carries a cornucopia linking her
with the goddess TYCHE (fortune) and may commonly be flanked by lions.
She **Asuras**

sometimes carries a rudder or wears the mural Sky gods. Hindu (Vedic).
Identified in the open-crown of a city guardian. There are hints of sky
ing of the *Rg Veda,* they become demonic in later affinities in some
depictions, with a sign of the Hinduism, the antagonists of the *DEVA*
gods.

zodiac or a nimbus-like veil.

Her earliest consort is DUSˇARA, but in later times she is linked with
the Syrian storm god HADAD. At **Asvins**

Dura and Hierapolis (Hera-Atargatis), she tended Physician gods. Hindu
(Vedic). Twin gods owning to overshadow Hadad. Atargatis is also a fish
god-horses, the sons of VIVASVAN and SARANYU.

dess depicted like a mermaid and in most of her Depicted in a chariot
drawn by horses or birds.

cult centers she enjoyed a sacred lake stocked with Attributes: book,
vessel with herbs and water jar.

fish. Statues of Hadad and Hera-Atargatis were carried in twice-yearly
processions to the sea from Hierapolis, and by the third century BC her
cult **Asvayujau** *(harnessing horses)* had reached Egypt. Greek
writers of the Hellenic Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and period
describe her as a "radiate" goddess, which Puranic). A benevolent
*NAKSATRA,* or astral deity; suggests some links with sun symbolism.

daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

Also Allat.

Also Asvini and Asvinyau.

**Atarsˇamain** *(morning star of heaven)* **Ataa Naa Nyongmo**

Astral deity of uncertain gender. Pre-Islamic Creator god. Gan
\[district around Accra, Ghana, northern and central Arabian. Worshiped
partic-West Africa\]. He engendered the earth and also ularly by the
Isˇamme tribe, but revered widely controls the sun and the rain. He
causes disasters among other Arabs. Known from circa 800 BC

such as epidemics and earthquakes if his laws and and identified in
letters of the Assyrian kings rites are disobeyed.

Esˇarhaddon and Assurbanipal. May be synonymous with the Arab goddess
ALLAT whose cult was centered on Palmyra.

**Ataecina**

Local chthonic underworld goddess. Romano-Iberian. Known from
inscriptions in the Tagus **Ate**

region, where the Romans identified her with the Minor goddess of
misfortune. Greek. A daughter goddess PROSERPINA.

of ZEUS, she personifies blind folly leading to disaster.

**Atargatis**

Mother goddess. Northern Syrian. She enjoyed **Atea**

major cults at Khirbet Tannur, where she is Supreme god. Polynesian. The
father of the gods depicted as the vegetation goddess in nine
sepa-depicted as a hybrid, his body divided vertically,

[]{#index_split_000.html#p51}36 **ATEN**

the left half being fishy and the right half of point toward a royal
personage they hold the *ankh* human form. In the tradition of the
Hervey symbol of life. The god is never drawn in human Islands, he is
the firstborn son of the primordial or animal form.

mother VARI-MA-TE-TAKERE. After a short exis-Akhenaten first built a
sanctuary to Aten adja-tence low down in the world coconut living cent
to that of AMUN in the Karnak complex at immediately above his mother,
he moved to the Thebes. The main cult center was to the north of opening
of the upper world. He is largely com-Thebes on the east bank of the
Nile at el-Amarna, parable to TANE, the god of light. Also AVATEA, where
a huge sanctuary was constructed. It was Vatea, Wakea.

open to the sky (and the rays of Aten) and the main ceremonials took
place at dawn. It acted as a contentious rival to the cult of Amun-Re at
Kar-ATEN *(the sun disc)*

nak, which Akhenaten suppressed. All the temples **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
Creator sun god.

to Aten were later destroyed, as was most of his **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 2000 BC until iconography. Akhenaten ruled from
el-Amarna late in Egyptian history, but of little influence for the
remainder of his reign. One of his queens, after 1362 BC.

Nefertiti, was also a staunch Aten worshiper.

**SYNONYMS** Aton.

The elevation of Aten was influenced by politics **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
chiefly at Thebes but also at (the strength of the Amun-Re priesthood
was Heliopolis, Memphis, el-Amarna and other becoming excessive), and it
is notable that Akhen-sanctuaries in the Nile valley.

aten alone had access to, or knowledge of, the god.

**ART REFERENCES** monument at Giza, wall paint-Aten worship was also
undeniably the result of a ings at Karnak and el-Amarna.

growing interest in the concept of a single creator **LITERARY SOURCES**
various papyri, inscriptions god and was the first arguable
demonstration of and coffin texts.

monotheism. Very little detail of the cult survives.

Aten, the sun as a disc, was revered as a numen in his own right,
distinct from Atum or Re, from **Atete**

circa 2000 BC and possibly earlier. His influence Fertility goddess.
Kafa \[Ethiopia, northeastern had been growing under several pharaohs
includ-Africa\]. She was assimilated into the Christian ing Amenhotep
II, Tuthmosis IV and Amenhotep cult of the Virgin Mary, but is probably
the sub-III, who initiated a cult of Aten at Heliopolis.

ject of an ancient fertility rite performed by Aten rose to ultimate
supremacy for a brief period women who collect various sacred plants and
during the reign of Amenhotep IV who renamed throw them into the river.
The festival is known himself Akhenaten in honor of the god. During as
Astar yo Mariam (Epiphany of Mary).

Akhenaten's reign from 1379 BC Aten became the supreme god of Egypt,
eclipsing all others.

The iconography of Aten is very distinctive. It **ATHENA**

began as a winged sun disc with outstretched **ORIGIN** Greek. Goddess
of war and patron arms, but this was refined into a sun disc
embel-defender of many Greek cities.

lished with the *uraeus* (see WADJET) and sub-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 800 BC and tended by thin arms, like the rays of the sun, each
earlier until Christianization (circa AD 400) and of which ends in a
human hand. Where the latter later.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p52}**Atropos** 37

**SYNONYMS** Athene; PALLAS ATHENAE (maiden identified as the
daughter-in-law of the king of goddess of Athens); MINERVA (Roman).

heaven. She is also known from pre-Islamic south-CENTER(S) OF CULT
Athens but also Argos, ern Arabia as a consort of the moon god AMM.

Sparta, Gortyn, Larisa (Thessaly); Lindos and *See also* ASĚRAH.

Ilion (Homer's Troy).

**ART REFERENCES** the Parthenon frieze and other sculptures and
iconography throughout the **Aticandika** *(exceedingly great)* Greek
world, including notably the Athena of Distinct form of the goddess
DURGA. Hindu Phidias (Varvakeion) and the *metope* of Olympia (Puranic).
One of a group of nine deities, known in which she assists HERAKLES to
support the sky.

as the "nine durgas."

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Iliad* and *Odyssey* (Homer); *Theogony* and *Hymn
to Pallas Athene* (Hesiod).

**Atl**

Athena is a principal goddess of the Greek pan-Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) theon and, according to Hesiod, the daughter of

\[Mexico\]. The sun deity representing the fourth METIS (wisdom) born
fully armed from the head of the five world ages each of which lasted
for of ZEUS. A goddess of battle and allegedly a snake 2,028 heavenly
years, each heavenly year being goddess, she is a deity who also stands
for disci-fifty-two terrestrial years. Assigned to water and pline
against the more unruly conduct of such as presided over by
CHALCHIUHTLICUE. According HERMES and POSEIDON. Her most famed sanctu-to
tradition, the age ended in a cataclysmic ary is the Parthenon. The
olive tree is sacred to destruction caused by a deluge during which all
her, particularly that grown by tradition on the the human population
were turned into fish.

Acropolis, whose oil was given to the victors in Illustrated by the
"Stone of the Four Suns" \[Yale the *Panathenaia* festival. According to
legend she Peabody Museum\]. Also 4(Atl), Atonatiuh and offered the
olive to mankind. Her symbol is the Chalchiutonatiuh.

*aigis---* the skin of a sacrificial goat. She is also associated with
ship-building and with domestic crafts including wool work and
spinning---

**Atlahua**

`</i>`{=html}

*Athenian women have traditionally woven the Minor god of lakes and fish
hunters. Aztec (clas-peplos* at the *Panathenaia* festival. In legend
she is sical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group the destroyer of
Ajax and lures Hector to his classed as the Mixcoatlcamaxtli complex.

death, while supporting such heroes as Perseus against the Gorgon
monster, and Diomedes against ARES. She also acts as a moderating
influ-Atropos

ence in Achilles' conflict with Agamemnon, the Goddess of fate.
Pre-Homeric Greek. According most notable instance of her characteristic
ability to Hesiod, one of the daughters of ZEUS and for self-control.

THEMIS. One of an ancient trio of *MOIRAI* with LACHESIS and KLOTHO. She
is responsible for the final part of a mortal life, the unturning
inevitabil-Athirat

ity of death, and she is depicted holding a pair of Fertility goddess.
Western Semitic (Canaanite).

scales. The name of the plant *Atropa belladonna* In Old Babylonian
texts of Hammurabi she is (deadly nightshade) derives from her.

[]{#index_split_000.html#p53}38 **Attar**

**Attar**

carried from Pessinus and installed in the Temple God of the morning
star. Western Semitic. In of Victory on the Palatine Hill. The day
sacred to Canaanite legend, he attempts to usurp the dead Attis was
March 22 when a pine tree was carried BAAL but proves inadequate to fill
the god's into the Temple of Cybele and decorated with throne. In
semi-arid regions of western Asia flowers and models of Attis. In
Christian times the where irrigation is essential, he was sometimes
Easter festival took over the date of the Attis rites.

worshiped as a rain god. His female counterpart is the Phoenician
ASTARTE. Also probably identified as Dhu-Sˇamani in more southerly
regions.

`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_001.html}

**Atua Fafine**

Creator being. Polynesian \[Tikopia\]. One of a pair with ATUA I
RAROPUKA when the land of **ATTIS**

Tikopia was pulled up from the bottom of the **ORIGIN** Phrygia
\[northwestern Turkey\]. Vegeta-ocean. They may have been there from the
out-tion god.

set, or arrived on the back of a turtle from foreign **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 500 BC and parts. They engendered five sons, all gods.

probably earlier until circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** none specific.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Anatolian region and later **Atua I Kafika**

throughout Greek and Roman areas of culture.

Supreme god. Polynesian \[Tikopia\]. Regarded as **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and reliefs.

an intercessor rather than as ultimate creator or **LITERARY SOURCES**
Roman writers, especially controller.

Virgil.

Attis is a "dying and rising" fertility god modeled **Atua I Raropuka**

on the Mesopotamian DUMUZI. He is considered Creator being. Polynesian
\[Tikopia\]. One of a to have originated as a shepherd. In alternative
pair with Atua Fafine when the land of Tikopia traditions, KYBELE, the
"great mother," is either was pulled up from the bottom of the ocean.

his mother or purely his consort. Another legend They may have been
there from the outset, or suggests he was conceived immaculately by the
arrived on the back of a turtle from foreign parts.

demigoddess NANA when she placed a ripe They engendered five sons, all
gods.

almond in her bosom. According to one legend he met his death gored by a
wild boar. In a more popular alternative, he castrated himself under a
**ATUM**

pine tree to offer his vitality to Kybele.

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Sun god and creator god.

The latter legend became enshrined in spring **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
Old Kingdom rites during which Greek, and later Roman, priests (circa
2700 BC) to end of Egyptian history (circa (Galli) wearing effeminate
costumes castrated AD 400).

themselves or gashed themselves with knives and **SYNONYMS** Atum-Re.

offered blood sacrifices to the goddess by burying **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Heliopolis.

them in the earth. The main center of cult was at **ART REFERENCES**
wall paintings particularly in Pessinus (Phrygia). The cult was brought
to Rome New Kingdom tombs in the Valley of the Kings in 204 BC when the
stone symbolizing the presence (Thebes), votive inscriptions,
contemporary of CYBELE (the Roman version of her name) was sculpture.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p54}**Avatea** 39

**LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid Texts; coffin texts; **Auseklis** *(morning
star)* *Book of the Dead,* etc.

Minor astral god. Pre-Christian Latvian. An attendant of the sun god,
linked with fertility and Atum is one of several interpretations of the
involved in the activity of the heavenly bath house.

major creator god of Egypt whose company is the product of a fragmented
pre-Dynastic tribal history. Atum shared Heliopolis with another sun
**AVALOKITESVARA** *(merciful lord)* god, RE and eventually became
joined with him as **ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. Bodhisattva or
*buddha*-

Atum-Re or Re-Atum. The god was self-created designate.

from the primeval ocean and by masturbating he **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 500 BC to produced the next two great deities of the
Egypt-present.

ian cosmos, SˇU and TEFNUT, who also constitute **SYNONYMS** nineteen
other forms listed.

the beginnings of the pantheon of nine Heliopo-CENTER(S) OF CULT
pan-Asiatic.

lis deities, the ENNEAD. Atum is generally repre-ART REFERENCES metal
and stone sculptures, sented in human form and often wears a crown
paintings.

which combines those of Upper and Lower **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Sadhanamala* and Tantric rit-Egypt. He is represented as various
animals ual texts.

including the bull, lion, snake and lizard. Atum was regarded as the
progenitor of the Egyptian One of the most important deities of the
Mahayana pharaohs.

sect of Buddhism. In Lamaism he is the tutelary Both Atum and Re are
represented by a divine god of Tibet. He equates with VISŇU in Hinduism
black bull, Mnevis or Mer-wer, wearing the sun and bears links with
PADMAPANI. In cosmic mythol-disc and *uraeus* or snake between its
horns. It acts ogy he is a creator deity. His SAKTI is PANDARA and as an
intercessor between the sun god and his his attendant animal is a lion.
Many forms of Aval-priests in Heliopolis.

okitesvara exist which may include varieties with up to eleven heads,
sometimes arranged in a pyramid.

Color: white or red. Attributes: blue lotus, image of **Atunis**

Amitabha (topmost pyramidal head), lotus, rosary, God. Etruscan. Known
from circa 350 BC onward sword and water jar.

in local inscriptions.

**NOTE:** in Chinese Buddhism he is represented *See also* ADONIS.

by the goddess Kuan-Tin, and in Japanese by KWANNON.

**Aufaniae**

Collective name for a group of mother goddesses.

**Avatea**

Celtic (Continental European). Known only from Moon god. Polynesian
\[Hervey Islands\]. The votive inscriptions and largely restricted to
the firstborn offspring of the great mother VARI-MA-Rhineland.

TE-TAKERE and the elder sibling of TINIRAU.

According to tradition, Vari-Ma-Te-Takere plucked a piece from her right
side to engender **Aurora**

Avatea, who is half man, half fish. He is divided Goddess of the dawn.
Roman. Derived from the vertically with his left side fishy and his
right side Greek deity EOS.

human. He is the father of gods and humankind,

[]{#index_split_001.html#p55}40 **Aveta**

and is said to live in the coconut of the world.

SĚRIDA. Consort of the sun god SˇAMASˇ whose After a temporary period
existing low down in marriage was celebrated at New Year in Babylon.

the shell, he was assigned to the opening of the upper world,
immediately above the home of Tinirau. Also Vatea; Wakea (Hawaiian).

**Ayaba**

Hearth goddess. Fon \[Benin, West Africa\]. The sister of LOKO, god of
the trees, whose wood is **Aveta**

burned in the home to cook food.

Goddess of birth and midwifery. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Known mainly
from clay figurines found at Toulon-sur-Allier, France. The models show
the **Ayi'-Uru'n Toyo'n** *(lord bright creator)* goddess with infants
at the breast and apparently Creator spirit. Yakut \[central Siberia\].

she is concerned especially with nursing mothers.

*See also* URU'N AJY TOYO'N.

The figure is often accompanied by a small lapdog.

**Ayiyanayaka**

**Avrikiti**

Plague god. Singhalese \[Sri Lanka\]. A deity of God of fishermen. Fon
\[Benin, West Africa\]. Stat-fields and woodlands who is still revered
as a ues of this deity, in a sitting position, were placed guardian of
crops and a protector against plague.

on the beaches and fishermen and local elders sacrificed to them
annually to ensure a good season of catches.

**Ayurvasita** *(control of life)* Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a
group of twelve VASITAS or goddesses personifying the **Awonawilona**

disciplines of spiritual regeneration. Color: Creator god. Pueblo Indian
(Zuni) \[Mesoamer-whitish red. Attributes: image of Amidabuddha ica\].
The androgynous creator of heaven and and jewel.

earth and of all life, which he engendered by tossing pieces of his skin
into the primeval ocean.

**Ayyappan**

Local god of growth. Hindu. Particularly recog-Axo-Mama

nized in the Kerala region.

Goddess of potato crops. South American Indian

\[Peru\]. A model of this minor deity was made out of parts of the plant
as a harvest fetish and kept for **Azizos**

a year before being burned in a ritual to ensure a Astral tutelary god.
Pre-Islamic northern Ara-good potato harvest.

bian. Locally worshiped at Palmyra, where he personifies the morning
star, in company with his brother ARSU, who is the evening star.
Associated **Aya**

with horses or camels. He was also venerated sep-Mother goddess.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-arately in Syria as god of the morning star, in
Akkadian). Derived from the Sumerian model of company with the astral
god Monimos.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p56}B

6

**Ba (1)**

**BAAL** *(lord)*

Goddess of drought. Chinese. She is identified **ORIGIN** Western
Semitic (Canaanite) \[northern in some texts as the daughter of the god
HUANG

Israel, Lebanon and later Egyptian\]. Vegetation TI.

deity and national god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 2000 BC or earlier to 200 BC.

**Ba (2)**

**SYNONYMS** Aliyn Baal; HADAD.

Ram god. Egyptian (Lower). A fertility **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Ugarit
\[Ras Sˇamra and deity from early in Egyptian religion invoked Jebel el
Aqra\]; Asďod during Philistine period.

particularly at Mendes. In a later cult, the Otherwise generally down
the corn-bearing name *ba* comes to represent the spirituality of a
coastal plain of the eastern Mediterranean, deity, often represented in
an animal, e.g. the including Baal-Hazor, Baal-Sidon and Baal-bull, or
the mortal manifestation of a god as Tyre \[Lebanon\]. Memphis
\[Egypt\].

pharaoh.

**ART REFERENCES** a stele from Ras Sˇamra has a seated god with bull
horns which is thought to be either Baal or IL; a model calf recently
dis-Ba Xian

covered there may also symbolize Baal.

Collective name for gods. Taoist (Chinese). A **LITERARY SOURCES**
Ugaritic creation texts from group of eight divine beings, once mortal,
Ras Sˇamra, particularly the legends of *Baal and* who achieved
immortality through their *ANAT* and *Baal and MOT; Vetus Testamentum.*

exemplary lifestyles. There are many such groups in Chinese religious
belief. The Ba Baal may have originated in pre-agricultural times Xian
are probably the most widely revered.

as god of storms and rain. He is the son of DAGAN

Many people carry amulets and other charms and in turn is the father of
seven storm gods, the in the form of the symbols of these deities.

Baalim of the *Vetus Testamentum,* and seven mid-The eight gods are Cao
Guo-jiu; HAN XIANG-wife goddesses, the SASURATUM. He is considered ZI;
HE XIAN-GU; LAN CAI-HE; LI TIE-GUAI; LU

to have been worshiped from at least the nine-DONG-BIN; ZHANG GUO-LAO;
and ZHONG-LI teenth century BC. Later he became a vegetation QUAN.

god concerned with fertility of the land. Baal is 41

[]{#index_split_001.html#p57}42 **Baal Malage** said to have gained his
kingship in primeval times **Baal Malage**

wrested, with the help of weapons made by divine Local tutelary god.
Western Semitic (Phoenician).

craftsmen (see also OTHIN), from the powers of Probably of Canaanite
origin, closely equating with chaos in the form of the sea and the river
tyran-BAAL SˇAMIN and known only from inscriptions.

nies, or more specifically the god Yamm.

Baal lives in a vast and opulent palace on a mountain called Sˇapan. Old
connotations of a **Baal Sˇamin** *(lord of heaven)* weather god remain
in the texts which describe Head of the pantheon. Western Semitic
(Phoeni-the voice of Baal as being like thunder, and a hole cian).
Probably originated in Canaanite culture as in the floor of his palace
through which he waters a god of rain and vegetation, but became
exten-the earth. According to one text his servants are sively revered
in places as far apart as Cyprus and in the form of seven pages and
eight boars, all of Carthage. Epithets include "bearer of thunder."

which, like his daughters, PIDRAY daughter of Baal Sˇamin is first
mentioned in a fourteenth cen-mist and Tallay daughter of showers,
probably tury BC treaty between the Hittite king Suppiluli-have a
fertility function. Sister of the goddess uma and Nigmadu II of Ugarit.
He had a major Anat, he reflects the confrontation theme, first
sanctuary at Byblos, according to inscription, "built established in
ancient Near Eastern religions, of by Yehemilk." Josephus confirms that
his cult a god constantly and energetically engaged with existed at the
time of Solomon. At Karatepe his the forces of disorder. It is a combat
that causes name appears at the head of a list of national deities his
temporary ill-fortune but from which, annu-and on Seleucid coinage he is
depicted wearing a ally, he emerges triumphant. Baal is said to have
half-moon crown and carrying a radiate sun disc.

sired a bull calf, the guarantee of his power in Other epithets include
"lord of eternity" and he absence, before descending to the underworld
to may also have been god of storms at sea, a patron challenge the
forces of chaos in the form of the deity of mariners. By Hellenic times
he equated god Mot (see also INANA/ISŤAR); he dies, is with ZEUS in the
Greek pantheon and the Romans restored through the efforts of Anat and
in the identified him as Caelus (sky). Also Baal-Sˇamem.

seventh year kills Mot ( *VT* Exodus 23.10-11

describes six years of harvest followed by a seventh year in which the
land must lie fallow). Vic-Baal Sapon

tory was celebrated at the autumn festival of New Local tutelary god.
Western Semitic (Phoenician).

Year in the month of Tisři pending the arrival of Probably of Canaanite
origin and closely equating the rains. Baal-zebul ( *VT*) derives from
Baal and with BAAL SˇAMIN. According to Ugaritic texts he *zbl* meaning
prince.

lives on a mountain in the north of Phoenicia From the mid-sixteenth
century BC in the known as Saphan, which may have served as a
bea-Egyptian New Kingdom, Baal enjoyed a signifi-con for mariners. Other
local variations of moun-cant cult following, but the legend of his
demise tain deities include Baal Hermon and Baal Brathy.

and restoration was never equated with that of OSIRIS.

In the Greco-Roman period, Baal became **Baba**

assimilated in the Palestine region with ZEUS and Fertility goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and JUPITER, but as a Punic deity \[Carthage\] he
was Babylonian-Akkadian). Locally worshiped in allied with SATURNUS, the
god of seed-sowing.

Lagasˇ, where Gudea built her a temple. Also Bau.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p58}**Bagala** 43

**Babi**

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and reliefs.

Malevolent god. Egyptian. Known from as early **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Aeneid* (Virgil) etc.

as the Old Kingdom (circa 2700 BC). Babi is seen as a violent and
hostile deity whose pres-Bacchus is modeled closely on the Greek god
ence can be highly dangerous during the cere-DIONYSOS. In Roman
mythology his parents are mony of the Weighing of the Heart in the Hall
JUPITER and SEMELE, the daughter of Kadmos, who of the Two Truths (see
also AMMUT). Con-became deified only after her death by fire on versely
he can also act in a protective capacity.

Olympus. Bacchus grew up through childhood with Closely associated with
sexual virility in the a wet-nurse Ino (LEUKOTHEA). As a youth he was
underworld, Babi is ithyphallic. A god active in entrusted to the satyr
Silenus. He is depicted as a the darkness, his penis serves variously as
the youthful figure wearing an ivy or grape crown and mast on the
underworld ferry boat, and the bolt carrying a wand or *thyrsus*. He is
also frequently on heaven's doors. Depicted as an ithyphallic drawn
riding in a chariot pulled by leopards.

male baboon.

As god of wine and intoxication, his court includes the female
Bacchantes, nymphs, fauns and satyrs. Bacchus was worshiped extensively
**Bacabs**

and commanded a number of festivals including Attendant gods. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) the *Liberalia* and *Bacchanalia.* These
possess

\[Mexico\]. Four deities identified with points of strongly phallic
connotations and on occasions the compass and colors, thus Hobnil (red)
resides the god was represented by a model phallus.

in the east, Can Tzicnal (white) in the north, Zac Cimi (black) in the
west and Hozanek (yellow) in the south. They are also identified as the
Toliloch **Badb**

(opossum actors) in the Codex Dresden, where War goddess. Celtic
(Irish). One of the aspects of each carries the image of the ruling god
for the the MORRIGAN. Capable of changing shape at incoming year on his
back. Hobnil is also a patron will. She confronts the Irish hero Cu
Chulainn deity of beekeepers.

before a battle and terrifies him by turning into Badb Catha, the crow
and harbinger of death.

**Bacax**

Local god. Roman-North African. A rare exam-Badi Mata

ple of a named deity from this region, thought to Mother goddess. Hindu
\[northern Indian\]. A have been worshiped as a cave god. Known from
SAKTI and one of the seven SAPTAMATARAS

inscription at Cirta \[Constantine\].

(mothers) who in later Hinduism became regarded as of evil intent,
attacking children during puberty. Particularly recognized in Bengal.

**BACCHUS**

**ORIGIN** Roman. God of wine and intoxication.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to **Bagala** *(power of
cruelty)* AD 400.

Goddess. Hindu. One of a group of ten **SYNONYMS** LIBER; DIONYSOS
(Greek).

MAHAVIDYAS personifying the SAKTI of SˇIVA.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout Roman world.

Aspects include VIRARATRI.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p59}44 **Bagba**

**Bagba**

mythology, he first created animals during the Animistic spirit. West
African. Fetish who Dreamtime and then gathered them all together
allegedly controls the wind and rain and in order to select various of
their characteris-whose *shaman* keeps the winds locked in a tics, which
he incorporated into human beings.

huge pot.

He fashioned two men and a woman from the red earth of Australia, showed
them the plants that they could eat with safety and created **Bagisht**

laws for them to follow. He is the father of God of flood waters and
prosperity. Kafir DARAMULUM and is identified in the heavens

\[Afghanistan\]. The son of the supreme goddess by the Southern Cross.
In other aboriginal DISANI, conceived when she was raped from traditions
he is known as Twanyrika.

behind by an obscure demonic entity in the shape of a ram who violated
her while she was milking cows by a lakeside. Bagisht is said to have
been **Bala** *(girl)*

born in the current of the Prasun river where-1. Mother goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic).

upon the turbulent waters became smooth-flow-Of vague affinity but
generally of youthful ing and parted to allow the infant to reach the
appearance. Seated upon a lotus throne. Attrib-bank. There seem to have
been no elaborate sanc-utes: book and rosary.

tuaries but rather an abundance of simple shrines 2. Messenger goddess.
Jain \[India\]. One of the always placed close to water. The god was
cele-twenty-four SASANADEVATAS.

brated at the main festivals of the Kafir agricultural year and received
sacrificial portions of meat. Also Opkulu.

**Balakrsna**

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). KRSNA in child form (see Krsna).

**Bagvarti**

Tutelary goddess. Urartian \[Armenia\]. The consort of the creator god
HALDI.

**Balam** *(jaguar)*

Guardian deities. Mayan (Yucatec, classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].
Poorly defined spirits **BAIAME**

who protect individuals in daily life. Four *balam* **ORIGIN**
Australian aboriginal.

stand at the cardinal points around a village to **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** from antiquity.

guard against dangerous animals. They also pro-SYNONYMS Biame, Byamee

tect the four sides of a *milpa* (smallholding) against thieves.

Baiame is a creator god, revered as the supreme being and instrument of
good, principally by the Wiradyuri and Kamilaroi groups of aborigines
**Balaparamita**

*(perfection of strength)*

in the southeast of Australia. His chief consort Philosophical deity.
Buddhist. One of a group is generally referred to as BIRRAHGNOOLOO. His
of twelve PARAMITAS. Spiritual offspring of voice is represented when
the "bull roarer"

RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: red. Attributes: book native instrument is swung
and, according to and banner with jewel.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p60}**Baltis** 45

**Balarama** *(strength of Rama)* Balder is the spotless "good" god, the
"shining Incarnation of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and one," OTHIN's
favored second son. He lives in a Puranic). May have originated in Vedic
times as an hall named Breidablik. He is the father of the god
agricultural fertility deity. He is the son of FORSETI. According to
Snorri's account, Balder VASUDEVA and DEVAKI, though born from the was
made invulnerable to injury or death by his womb of ROHINI. Jointly with
KRSNA (his brother), mother FRIGG who had extracted a promise from he is
identified as the eighth *avatara* (incarnation)

"all things" not to harm him. She had omitted the of Visňu, or, with
RAMA, as the seventh. Legend mistletoe as being too small and
insignificant and describes how Visňu impregnated the belly of the so,
using the blind god HODER as his instrument, goddess Devaki with two
hairs, one black, one LOKI caused Balder's death by guiding Hoder's
white. To ensure their safety against a demon king, hand and turning a
sprig of mistletoe into a they were transferred before birth to Rohini.
Krsna lethal dart.

grew to be dark-skinned, and Balarama light. The Saxo, in contrast,
defines Balder as a warrior latter enjoys similar characteristics to
Krsna but slain by a magic sword in a battle of jealous rivalry fails to
attract the same popularity. He is usually between him and Hoder for the
hand of the god-depicted on the right side of Krsna, rarely standing
dess NANNA. There are separate suggestions that alone. The consort of
Balarama is REVATI and his Balder traveled the road to the underworld
ruled sons are Nisatha and Ulmuka. Epithets included by HEL in company
with many other slain war-Ananda (joy). In Jainism he is known as
Baladeva.

riors, implying that he met his death in a wider Attributes: arrow,
club, drinking cup, fan palm, combat.

honey pot, lotus, pestle, pitcher, plough, prayer There is no evidence
of a Germanic precedent wheel, shield and sword.

for Balder and he is probably of purely Norse extraction. Attempts have
been made to cast him as a copy of Christ but these seem wholly
**Bala-Sakti**

unfounded. It is also impossible to relate Balder to Goddess. Dravidian
(Tamil) \[southern India\].

the dying and rising gods found in other religions Youthful deity who
presides over six CAKRAS or (DUMUZI, TELEPINU, OSIRIS, etc.), since
there is prayer wheels. Often accompanied by a geomet-no suggestion of
his return from Hel's kingdom of ric magical diagram or *yantra*.
Attributes: book, the dead, though there is an implication that he hook,
noose and rosary.

will be released by Hel at Ragnarok.

**BALDER** *(lord)*

**Bali**

**ORIGIN** Icelandic (Nordic). The dying god.

Demonic god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
AD 700 (possibly ear-son of Virocana, his power was removed by VISŇU

lier) through to Christianization (circa AD 1100).

in his *avatara* of VAMANA.

**SYNONYMS** Baldr; Baldaeg (Anglo-Saxon).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** unknown.

**ART REFERENCES** stone carvings.

**Baltis**

**LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose* Local goddess.
Pre-Islamic Arabian. Known from *Edda* (Snorri); *Historia Danica*
(Saxo), runic Carrhae in western Mesopotamia and identified
inscriptions.

as the apotheosis of the planet Venus.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p61}46 **Banba**

**Banba**

among the Pyramid Texts, he had a cult following Fertility goddess.
Celtic (Irish). One of the and was associated in some way with pain or
spir-aspects of the MORRIGAN. A name of the "Sover-itual anguish
affecting the king.

eignty of Ireland" to whom the king was married in symbolic ceremony.
Also a goddess of war capable of changing shape from girl to hag, and
**Baphomet**

into birds and animals.

A medieval deity allegedly worshiped in secret by *See also* BADB, ERIU,
Fodla, Medb and MAEVE.

the Knights Templar, Baphomet is known from the fourteenth century or
possibly earlier. The name may be a corruption of the Islamic founder
**Banebdjedet**

and prophet, Mahomet, but its etymology Ram god. Egyptian (Lower).
Possibly concerned remains unclear. Described by its critics as a with
arbitration, his consort is the fish goddess source and initiator of
evil, some authorities have HATMEHYT. He is the father of HARPOKRATES.

placed the idol of Baphomet at the center of ini-According to tradition
(Chester Beatty I papyrus) tiation and other magical rituals once
practiced by he was called upon to intercede in the contest for the
Templars. In part it was this tradition that the Egyptian kingdoms
between HORUS and brought charges of heresy against the Templars at
SETH. He is placed in some accounts in Upper the end of the thirteenth
and start of the four-Egypt on the island of Seheil at the first Nile
teenth centuries, after which they fell into dis-cataract, but his cult
is centered on Mendes in grace. The precise nature of any idolatory is
the Delta region of Lower Egypt \[Tell et-Ruba\]

unknown, though there are unsubstantiated and is closely linked with the
mother of Rameses claims that the image was modeled androgy-III. He is
generally depicted in anthropomorphic nously on that of ARTEMIS of
Ephesus.

form, but with the head of a ram.

The image of Baphomet was romanticized during the nineteenth century by
the German anti-quarian Josef von Hammer-Purgstall. In a **Banga**

publication entitled *Mysterium Baphometis Revela-God of clear waters.
Ngbandi \[northern Democ-tum* he gave the deity the form either of a
severed ratic Republic of Congo and Central African head with two faces,
bearded or unshaven, or of a Republic\]. One of seven gods invoked at
day-black cat. The bearded figure is depicted in the break, the creator
deity of white-skinned people.

church of St. Merri in Paris. Alternative imagery has been of an
androgynous Satanic goat sitting **Bangputys**

astride the world with a flaming torch located Sea god. Pre-Christian
Lithuanian. Known as the between the horns, a star above the eyes,
female

"god who blows the waves."

breasts, a reptilian belly surmounted by snakes and goat-like hoofs.
This imagery was depicted by the nineteenth-century romantic interpreter
of **Ba-Pef**

occultism Eliphas Levi, and Baphomet was Chthonic underworld god.
Egyptian. An obscure adopted subsequently as the tutelary deity of the
malevolent deity known from the Old Kingdom quasi-magical *Ordo Templi
Orientis* organization (circa 2700 BC) in which he may have enjoyed a
founded by the twentieth-century English priesthood. According to
limited references occultist Aleister Crowley.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p62}**Beg-Tse** 47

**Barastar**

able in character. The cat was considered sacred Chthonic underworld
god. Ossetian \[Caucasus to her and cat cemeteries, containing mummified
region\]. The judge of souls, directing them either animals, have been
found at various sites. Her to paradise or to oblivion.

name involves the hieroglyph for a sealed alabaster jar containing
perfume. In the sanctuary of Khafre at Giza, her name is engraved on the
**Barsˇamin**

facade with that of the goddess HATHOR, sym-Weather or sky god.
Pre-Christian Armenian.

bolizing the protectresses of north and south Probably derived from the
Semitic god BAAL

respectively. In Hellenic times she is partly syn-SˇAMIN.

cretized with ARTEMIS.

**Basamum**

**Bat**

God of healing. Pre-Islamic southern Arabian.

Cow goddess of fertility. Egyptian (Upper). She The name probably
derives from the remedial was probably well known in the Old Kingdom
plant balsam.

(circa 2700 BC onward). Associated principally with Upper Egypt, for a
while she may have rivaled Hathor in Lower Egypt but by the time of
**BASTET**

the New Kingdom (sixteenth century BC) her **ORIGIN** Egyptian. Feline
goddess associated with influence had waned. She may be represented on
the vengeance of the sun god.

the Narmer Palette (Cairo Museum) which com-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 2700 BC to memorates the unification of the two kingdoms.

the end of Egyptian history (circa AD 400).

Bat is only rarely found in large sculptures and **SYNONYMS** none.

paintings, but is often the subject of Egyptian **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Bubastis in the Delta region period jewelry, including amulets and
ritual of Lower Egypt and probably at the Karnak sistrum rattles.
Depicted as a cow or anthropo-temple complex in Upper Egypt.

morphically with bovine ears and horns. Also Bata.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures, wall paintings, papyrus illustrations.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Middle Kingdom coffin **Baubo**

texts etc.

Mother goddess. Western Semitic (Syrian).

Known locally from Priene and largely became Bastet is the daughter of
the sun god RE and is syncretized with ATARGATIS, KYBELE, etc.

regarded as his instrument of vengeance, the "rage in his eye."
Alternatively she is the eldest daughter of AMUN. She has a son, the
lion-headed god **Beg-Tse** *(concealed coat of mail)* MIHOS.

God of war. Buddhist and Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One Texts recounting battles
may describe the of a group of eight DHARMAPALA with terrible pharaoh's
enemies being slaughtered like the vic-appearance and royal attire.
Stands with one foot tims of Bastet. Thus she is first depicted as a on
a horse and one on a man. Color: red. Attrib-lioness, and then in the
guise of a cat from circa utes: banner, fire, skin and sword. May appear
1000 BC onward when she becomes more peace-with three eyes. Also
Cam-srin.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p63}48 **Behanzin**

**Behanzin**

Christian era in the festival of *Beltine* or *Cetshamain,* Fish god.
Fon \[Benin, West Africa\]. Invoked by set on May 1, the start of the
"warm season." The fishermen to ensure plentiful catches.

rites involved lighting huge bonfires and driving cattle between them as
a protection against disease.

It marked the season when cattle were liberated **Bel**

after winter to graze the open pastures.

Generic title meaning "lord." Mesopotamian Belenus bears many
similarities with the Greek (Babylonian-Akkadian). The Babylonian god
deity APOLLO as a god of light, sun and healing.

MARDUK was often addressed as Bel, and the Though appearing more often
as a purely Celtic name occurs in the *Vetus Testamentum.* The New god,
he was sometimes worshiped as Apollo Year festival of *akitu* in Babylon
included a cere-Belenus, for example at the thermal spring mony of
"leading Bel by the hand." The name also sanctuary at St. Sabine \[Côte
d'Or\], and in this appears at Palmyra as the tutelary creator god guise
became associated with horses which are whose attributes include
lightning and an eagle.

well-attested as sun symbols in the Celtic Bronze Age. Model horses were
found at the Gaul site.

Ausonius, a fourth century poet from the Bor-Belatucadros

deaux region, mentions Belenus sanctuaries in War god. Celtic (British).
According to some Aquitaine. Tertullian refers to them in Austria,
authors he is the horned god of the north equat-Herodian places others
in northern Italy.

ing to CERNUNNOS. The Romans syncretized him with the god MARS.

**Belet-Ili** *(lady of the gods)* Mother goddess. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-BELENUS

Akkadian). Known in Babylon and probably mod-ORIGIN Celtic (Continental
European and prob-eled on NINHURSAG˜A.

ably Irish). Pastoral deity concerned with light, solar worship and
healing.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times **Belet-Seri**

until Christianization (circa AD 400) and in Chthonic underworld
goddess. Mesopotamian some circumstances much later.

(Babylonian-Akkadian). The recorder of the dead **SYNONYMS** Apollo
Belenus; Bile (Irish).

entering the otherworld. Known as the "Scribe of **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
mainly sanctuaries in north-the Earth."

ern Italy (Aquileia) and southwestern Gaul (Aquitaine).

**ART REFERENCES** horse statuettes; stone carvings **Belili**

and reliefs.

Goddess. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian).

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Books of Invasions; Cycles of* See GESŤIN-ANA.

*Kings;* Roman writers---Tertullian, Herodian, Ausonius; votive
inscriptions.

**Bella Pennu**

Considered to be one of the oldest of the Celtic Sun god. Indian
(Khond). A local deity in the gods thus far recognized. Celebrated long
into the Orissa province synonymous with BOORA PENNU.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p64}**BES** 49

**Bellona**

(circa twenty-fifth century BC) and linked with Mother goddess and
goddess of war. Roman. She the sun god of Heliopolis, ATUM. He is also
said becomes syncretized with the Cappadocian to have been self-created
from the primeval ocean mother goddess MA. The first known temple and is
sometimes a symbol of rebirth in the after-dedicated to Ma-Bellona by
the Romans is dated life. Benu may have augmented the Greek classi-to
296 BC. Bellona was attended by Asiatic priests cal tradition of the
Phoenix. He appears in the who performed frenzied dances and gashed Old
Kingdom as a yellow wagtail but later themselves with swords, offering
the blood on the becomes a heron, wearing the conical white goddess's
altars. Because of its violent nature, crown of Upper Egypt with two
slender feathers Rome refused officially to recognize the cult until
pointing backwards from its crest.

the third century AD.

**Bera Pennu**

**Beltiya** *(my lady)*

Vegetation goddess. Northern Indian. Wor-Generic title of goddess.
Mesopotamian (Baby-shiped by the Khonds in Bengal. She was the
lonian-Akkadian). ZARPANITUM (SARPANITUM), recipient of human sacrifice
to ensure good har-the consort of the Babylonian god MARDUK, is vest,
particularly of the spice turmeric, and as a often addressed as Beltiya.

protection against disease and infirmity. The sacrificial victim or
*meriah* was youthful, often kept for years as a holy person before
death and was **Bendis**

always either the offspring of a previous sacrifi-Mother goddess.
Thracian. Hellenized and linked cial victim, or purchased from
impoverished fam-stylistically with ARTEMIS as a huntress. Appeared
ilies for the purpose. He or she was generally in Athens during the
Peloponnesian War. Attrib-strangled, sometimes in the fork of a tree,
after utes: boots, torch and pointed cap.

days of festivities. In other instances the victim was cut up alive.

**Benten-San**

Goddess of luck. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of seven deities classed as gods
of fortune and the only god-BES

dess in the group. A popular deity with many sanc-ORIGIN Egyptian.
Guardian deity of women in tuaries dedicated to her, she is a patron of
music labor.

and holds a *biwa* instrument in her hand. Snakes, **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** appearing in art believed to stand for jealousy, are often
coiled from circa 1500 BC and probably earlier, until around her
statues. Because of this, married cou-the end of Egyptian history circa
AD 400.

ples are reluctant to visit her shrines together. Her **SYNONYMS** none.

priesthood is both Shinto and Buddhist and she is **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
no specific sanctuaries, but a closely linked with the goddess S

household god and generally associated with ARASVATI.

birthplaces, including those of royalty.

**ART REFERENCES** walls of temples at Thebes; **Benu**

curved ivory batons from Middle Period; walls Transmuted bird-like form
of a sun god. Egypt-of birth houses.

ian (Upper). A deity mentioned in Pyramid Texts **LITERARY SOURCES**
none significant.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p65}50 **Bethel**

A dwarfish and hideous, but essentially benign good fortune in marriage.
One of six ADITYAS, deity whose ugliness wards off evil. He is generally
sons of the goddess ADITI. Consort: SIDDHI.

present at births exerting a protective influence.

Attributes: two lotuses, prayer wheel and Bes appears with a
large-bearded and barely trident.

human face, a thick body, short arms and short bandy legs. He wears a
plumed crown and often wields a short sword. He possesses a lion's mane,
**Bhagavan** *(the lord)*

ears, tail and usually has his mouth open and Tutelary god. Northern and
central Indian.

tongue protruding. As a god of birth, Bes often Worshiped by the Bhils
and other tribes as the carries the SA symbol of protection. He is also
original creator spirit and a judge of the dead sometimes drawn as a
musician with a tambourine.

soul. Also an epithet of VISŇU and KRSNA. Also Bes was adopted by
Greco-Roman culture. The Bhagwan.

Greeks depicted him in strongly ithyphallic guise with a
disproportionately large and erect penis and, from the time of the Roman
occupation, he **Bhairava** *(terrible)*

appears in the mode of a soldier wearing a short Minor frightful form of
the god SˇIVA. Hindu military tunic.

(Puranic and later). Guardian deity of doorways.

A so-called *ugra* aspect, generally depicted in similar style to Sˇiva
but with up to five heads and ten **Bethel**

arms and said to have been born from Sˇiva's Local tutelary god. Western
Semitic (Phoenician).

blood. Attributes: hook and noose. Aspects and Probably of Aramaean or
Syrian origin. First men-epithets include Kalaratri, KSETRAPALA and
tioned in a fourteenth century treaty between the MAHAKALA. Also
Bhairon, linked with the cult of Hittite king Suppiluliuma and Nigmadu
II of dogs and BHAIRAVA, one of a group of Ugarit \[Ras Sˇamra\]. He
appears more regularly on MAHAVIDYAS personifying the SAKTI of Sˇiva.

inscriptions from the end of the seventh century BC

and enjoyed considerable popularity during the neo-Babylonian period.
Bethel is mentioned in the **Bhaisajyaguru** *(supreme physician)*
Biblical text of Jeremiah 48.13, implying that some Physician god.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Israelites acknowledged this deity. There is no evi-Accounted among one
of a series of medicine dence of links with the historical place names,
*buddhas* known as a SMAN-BLA in Tibet. In including that mentioned in
Genesis 38.13.

Lamaism he is the fifth in a series of *manusibuddhas.* Typically
depicted with stretched earlobes and a row of small curls fringing the
forehead.

**Bhadra** *(auspicious)*

Color: blue or gold. Attributes: fruit, sometimes Minor goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). Atten-with a bowl.

dant of SˇIVA. Generally seated. Attributes: blue lotus, fruit, rosary
and trident.

**Bharani** *(bearing)*

Minor goddess of misfortune. Hindu (Epic and **Bhaga**

*(the dispenser of fortune)*

Puranic). A malevolent *NAKSATRA,* daughter Minor sun god. Hindu (Vedic
and Puranic).

of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA). Also In Vedic times, the incarnation
of women's Apabharanis.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p66}**Bhutadamara** 51

**Bharat Mata** *(Mother India)* Color: yellow. Attribute: image of
Amitabha, Mother goddess. Modern Hindu. Evolved from lotus, rosary,
staff, trident and water jar. Three-the writings of the nineteenth
century Bengali, eyed. Also JANGULI and VAJRATARA.

Bankim Chandra Chatterjee. Shrines are designed in the form of a map of
India.

**Bhumi**

*(the earth on which all things are* *formed)*

**Bharati**

Collective name for a group of deities. Buddhist Minor goddess of
sacrifices. Hindu (Vedic, Epic (Varyana). Twelve personifications of the
spiri-and Puranic). She is invoked to appear on the sac-tual spheres
through which a *BODHISATTVA* or rificial field before a ritual. Usually
associated *buddha*-designate passes in his quest for perfection with
the goddess SARASVATI. Also regarded as a of knowledge. Common
attribute: a staff.

consort of GANESA.

**Bhumi Devata**

**Bhavanavasi**

Vegetation goddess. Indian. Worshiped by many Gods. Jain \[India\]. A
generic name given to primitive tribes.

deities of youthful appearance who are arranged in ten groups all with
the suffix - *kumara*. Thus AGNI-; ASURA-; DIK-; DVIPA-; NAGA-;
STANITA-; **Bhumidevi** *(the earth goddess)* SUPARNA-; UDADHI-; VAYU-;
VIDYUT-.

Fertility goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic)

\[southern India\]. The second wife of VISŇU (or KRSNA). Her son is
Naraka. Bhumidevi is often **Bhima** *(terrible)*

depicted standing on the left (occasionally right) 1. Warrior god. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). A hand of the VARAHA *avatara* of Visňu. In the
prince of the mythical Pandu family and one of north she is known as
PUSTI. She is often depicted the heroes of the *Mahabharata* epic, Bhima
is usu-sitting on a lotus throne with bared breasts.

ally depicted wielding a sword and a club. He is a Attributes: blue
lotus, lotus, lute, pomegranate, son of the god of the winds VAYU. He is
perceived pot with herbs, pot with vegetables and water as a god of
immense strength and great cruelty, jar. Also Bhu, Bhudevi, BHUMI, MAHI,
PRTHIVI, which separates him from the heroic figure of VASUDHARA and
Zami-Mata.

ARJUNA, his brother, with whom he is linked in the epic. Attribute: a
club. Also Bhimasena.

2\. Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An **Bhumiya** *(guardian of
fields)* attendant of BUDDAKEPALA.

Fertility god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic) \[northern India\]. Guardian
deity of fields, worshiped as a rough stone icon. In later times a form
of VISŇU.

**Bhrkuti-Tara**

*(she who frowns)*

Mother goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. In Lamaism particularly, a
cruel form of TARA, the **Bhutadamara** *(tumult of demons)* mother of
the BUDDHA. The so-called "yellow God. Buddhist (Mahayana). May be
depicted Tara." An emanation of AMITABHA. Also identified reclining on
the Hindu goddess APARAJITA. Attrib-as a female BODHISATTVA or
*buddha*-designate.

utes: snakes in the hair, and staff. Three-eyed.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p67}52 **Bhutamata** **Bhutamata** *(mother of
goblins)* through the primordial world, fashioning Terrible goddess.
Hindu. A frightful form of creatures from clay and breathing spirit into
PARVATI. Accompanied by a lion. Attribute: human beings. Her eldest son
is DARAMULUM or phallus (on the head), shield and sword.

Gayandi, regarded as an intermediary between Baiame and humankind.

**Bhuvanesvari** *(lady of the spheres)* Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). One of a **Bishamon**

group of ten MAHAVIDYAS personifying the SAKTI God of luck. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of seven deities of SˇIVA. Also an epithet applied to
several god-concerned with fortune, he appears as desses. Aspects
include Siddharatri. Attributes: a warrior clad in full armor holding a
spear in one hook and noose.

hand and a toy pagoda, identified as a "tower of treasure" in the other.
He has been linked with the Buddhist god Vaisravana (KUBERA).

**Bia**

Goddess of force. Greek. The daughter of the underworld goddess STYX and
the sister of **Bo Hsian**

KRATOS, god of strength.

God. Taoist (Chinese). The Taoist counterpart of the Buddhist deity
SAMANTABHADRA. Usually depicted upon a white elephant. He is considered
**Bi-har**

to be a god of wisdom.

Guardian deity. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of the guardian
*maharajas* protecting against demons. Attended by a lion. Color: white.
Attrib-Boann *(she of the white cows)* utes: arrow, bow, knife, staff,
sword and trident.

River goddess. Celtic (Irish). The local goddess of Three-eyed.

the river Boyne. She is one of the consorts of the DAGDA, alternatively
of a minor local deity Elcmar, cuckolded by the Dagda who sent him
**Birdu**

away on an errand for nine months. The mother Minor chthonic underworld
god. Mesopotamian of Angus mac Og.

(Babylonian-Akkadian). Consort of MANUNGAL

*See also* AENGUS.

and syncretized with NERGAL.

**Bodhisattva** *(one whose essence is perfect* **Birrahgnooloo**

*knowledge)*

Creator goddess. Australian aboriginal. She is Generic title for a
*buddha*-designate. Buddhist recognized by several aboriginal clans as
the chief

\[northern India, Tibet, China and Japan\].

consort of BAIAME, the creator god. Revered as Any one of the earlier
stages of a future the all-mother of humankind and creator of living
*buddha*. Depicted wearing regal dress and things on earth, her role
largely parallels that of trappings, including a crown. The most
signif-Baiame. Traditions suggest that during the icant include
AVALOKITESVARA, MAITREYA and Dreamtime she planted vegetation as she
moved MANJUSRI.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p68}**BRAGI** 53

**Boldogasszony**

had a son called Bor. Bor, in turn, engendered Tutelary goddess.
Pre-Christian Hungarian. The the AESIR gods OTHIN, VILI and VE. Also
Borr.

guardian deity of women and children, she *See also* Othin.

became syncretized with the Virgin Mary after Christianization.

**Boreas**

God of the north wind. Greek and also Roman.

**Bolon Ti Ku**

He controlled the storm which destroyed the Chthonic underworld gods.
Mayan (classical Persian fleet sailing against Athens. Identified
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. A collective term for a with winter frosts.
According to the *Theogony* group of nine deities not otherwise clearly
(Hesiod), he is the son of EOS and Astraeos and is defined. They are
probably still invoked by mod-of Thracian origin: " . . . when Thracian
Boreas ern Mexican Indians.

huddles the thick clouds."

**Bombay Kamayan**

**Borvo**

Local disease goddess. Hindu \[northern India\].

God of healing. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Identi-Particularly worshiped at
Gaya.

fied with several therapeutic springs and mineral baths.

**Bonchor**

Tutelary god. Pre-Islamic Berber \[Tunisia\]. Prob-BRAGI *(poet;
leader)* ably recognized as a creator deity.

**ORIGIN** Nordic (Icelandic). God of poetry.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa AD 700) and earlier,
until Christianization (circa **Boora Pennu**

AD 1100).

God of light. Indian (Khond). A local deity in **SYNONYMS** described as
"the long bearded one."

the Orissa province who created the earth god-CENTER(S) OF CULT none
known.

dess TARI PENNU as his consort and through her **ART REFERENCES** none
known but probably the engendered the other great gods. Until recently
subject of anonymous carvings.

this deity was the subject of sacrifice in notori-LITERARY SOURCES
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* ous *meriah* rituals, which involved
violent human (Snorri).

sacrifice.

A Viking deity, said by Snorri to be a son of OTHIN and consort of
IDUNN, the goddess who **Bor**

keeps the apples of immortality for the gods of Archetypal god. Nordic
(Icelandic). In the cre-Asgard. Bragi is possibly also a pseudonym for
ation account, according to Snorri, a living crea-Othin himself. Often
found in company with ture called Ymir was formed in the misty void of
AEGIR. The cup over which oaths were sworn Ginnungagap. Ymir was
nourished by the milk of was known as the "cup of Bragi" and he was the
cow Audhumla, who licked salty ice blocks seen as a poet and orator in
the hall of the slain, and released a second individual called BURI. He
Valhalla.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p69}54 **BRAHMA**

**BRAHMA** *(the creator)* Brahma's current age is said to be fifty-one
and **ORIGIN** Hindu \[India\]. Creator god.

after each of his years, the universe is destroyed **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 500 BC or ear-and rebuilt.

lier until present day.

Brahma is generally less popular than Visňu or **SYNONYMS** many
epithets including Abjaja, Sˇiva, probably because he is identified
solely with Abjayoni, Astakarna, KAMALASANA.

the primordial account of creation. Legend **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
restricted since circa AD

describes how he created himself from the 700 to two sanctuaries---at
Lake Puskana in primeval waters using the power of his own Rajputana,
and at Idar near Mount Abu.

desire. He thought a seed into existence which **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally in bronze grew into a golden egg and from which he
but also in stone. Reliefs.

emerged after a year. The two halves of the shell **LITERARY SOURCES**
mentioned in *Rg Veda,* but became heaven and earth, within which he
fash-properly from *Ramayana* epic and from Puranic ioned the sky. The
*Ramayana* also describes him texts.

in the form of a boar which raises the earth on its tusks. By contrast
the *Mahabharata* accounts him With VISŇU and SˇIVA, Brahma is one of a
trinity born from a lotus in the navel of Visňu. Else-of supreme creator
deities in the Hindu pantheon.

where he emerges as a fish, or as a tortoise. Neg-His consort is
generally the goddess of wisdom, ative aspects of Brahma include
drunkenness and SARASVATI, but some sources identify the goddess
duplicity.

of speech, Vach. He also has a second consort, the One source describes
how the beautiful god-milkmaid GAYATRI. Originally the title referred to
dess SATARUPA was formed from half of Brahma's the power of occult
utterances which became own self but that, in an attempt to prevent him
associated with the priests or Brahmans.

looking on his daughter with incestuous desire, Brahma is depicted with
four heads, often she circled around him. His four heads resulted.

bearded, facing in four directions, and with four There was once a fifth
which Sˇiva decapitated hands, sometimes with one of them raised in with
the thumb of his left hand. It is said that blessing or promise. As a
god of knowledge he incest with his daughter is also partly responsible
often carries the Vedas (earliest Sanskrit mythol-for Brahma's limited
worship. Alternative legend ogy said to have sprung from his head) in
one of credits him with a daughter, Vach, by whom he his hands. Other
attributes include a water pot fathered the living world.

indicating prosperity, a spoon or a string of pearls.

2\. In Buddhist tradition he is also one of a group He may also carry a
staff and an alms dish. He of DHARMAPALA with terrible appearance and
may be depicted with red or pink skin, wearing a royal attire.

white robe or a loin cloth with a sacred cord across the shoulder. His
sacred animal is the goose.

**Brahmani**

According to one legendary source he was cre-Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic
and Puranic). A ated from the right side of the primordial creator SAKTI
who in later Hinduism became one of the force. His life is anticipated
as a hundred heavenly group of eight ASTAMATARAS or mothers. In years,
each of 360 days and nights. Each day, or another grouping one of nine
NAVASAKTIS or *kalpa,* is equal to 4,320,000 earthly years.

mothers. She is attended by a goose and wears a

[]{#index_split_001.html#p70}**Buadza** 55

yellow robe. Attributes: book, label, rosary, tri-KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP prehistoric times dent and water jar. Also Brahmi.

until Christianization (circa AD 1100) and after.

**SYNONYMS** Brigid; Bride; Banfile (poetess).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** various sanctuaries through-Bres Macelatha

out area of Celtic influence.

Vegetation god. Celtic (Irish). The son of ERIU

**ART REFERENCES** stone carvings.

and of the Fomorian king Elatha. He is therefore **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions*; *Cycles of* part TUATHA DE DANAAN by parentage
but, having *Kings*; various inscriptions.

become Lord of Ireland, he sides with the Fomorians in the Battle of
Moytura and is defeated.

A major Celtic pastoral deity, described as a "wise Concerned with the
supply of food from the land.

woman, the daughter of the DAGDA," Brigit became "Christianized" as St.
Brigit of Kildare, who lived from AD 450-523 and founded the first
**Brhaspati** *(lord of prayer)* female Christian community in Ireland.
She was Astral god. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). The originally
celebrated on February 1 in the festival personification of the planet
Jupiter. In Vedic of *Imbolc*, which coincided with the beginning of
texts he appears as a priest. The son of Angiras lactation in ewes and
was regarded in Scotland as and the *guru* of the later Hindu pantheon.
Con-the date on which Brigit deposed the blue-faced sidered to be almost
identical with BRAHMA. His hag of winter (see CAILLEACH BHEUR). The
consort is the goddess TARA and his son is Kaca.

Christian calendar adopted the same date for the He rides in a chariot
drawn by eight horses.

Feast of St. Brigit. There is no record that a Color: golden yellow.
Attributes: arrow, ax Christian saint ever actually existed, but in
Irish (golden), book, bow, rosary, staff and water jar.

mythology she became the midwife to the Virgin Mary. The name can be
traced into many Irish and European place names. It is also akin to
**Brigantia**

*Brhati* which means "exalted one" in Sanskrit.

Tutelary goddess. Romano-Celtic (British). The goddess of the Brigantes
in the West Riding of Yorkshire. She became identified with CAELESTIS.

**Britannia**

At Corbridge, Northumberland, there is an altar Tutelary goddess.
Romano-Celtic (British). The inscribed to various deities, including
Caelestis *genia loci* of Britain who first appears on the Brigantia. In
a carved stone relief at Birrens, on coinage of Antoninus Pius in the
second century the Antonine Wall in Scotland, she is depicted AD. She
became the symbol of the British Empire with the attributes of MINERVA.
She may also bear after being partly syncretized with the Roman links
with the goddess BRIGIT. She is frequently war goddess MINERVA.

associated with water and herding.

**Buadza**

**BRIGIT** *(exalted one)* God of the wind. Gan \[district around Accra,
**ORIGIN** Celtic (Continental European and Irish).

Ghana, West Africa\]. Also regarded as a storm Fertility goddess.

god. Also Olila.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p71}56 **BUDDHA**

**BUDDHA** *(enlightened)* **Buddhalocana** *(Buddha's eye)* **ORIGIN**
Buddhist \[India\]. The founder of Goddess. Buddhist (Shingon). A female
*buddha* Buddhism.

(see LOCANA).

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 500 BC to present day.

**SYNONYMS** Gautama, Siddharta.

**Buddhi** *(perception)*

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** pan-Asiatic.

1\. Minor goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Sometimes **ART REFERENCES** metal
and stone sculptures, identified as consort of the MAHA-GANAPATI form
paintings etc.

of the elephant god GANESA, depicted seated on **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Sadhanamala* and Tantric his knee.

ritual texts.

2\. Minor goddess. Jain.

The deity is regarded as having been an historical figure, born at
Kapilavastu near Gorakhpur. He died at Kusinagara in circa 486 BC. His
father was **Budha** *(awakening)*

SUDDHODANA of the Sakya clan, his mother was 1. Astral god. Hindu
(Vedic, Epic and Puranic).

MAYA and his wife YASODHARA.

The personification of the planet Mercury. The Buddha is, in certain
respects, the equal of the son of SOMA (CANDRA) and TARA or ROHINI.

Hindu god VISŇU. He is generally depicted with Depicted in a chariot
drawn by eight horses or shaven or cropped head and may be crowned.

lions (sometimes a single lion). Color: yellow.

The hair may be tightly curled. His color attrib-Attributes: bow, club,
rosary, shield and sword.

ute is gold.

Also Candraja and Candrasuta.

By tradition, he preached his first sermon at 2. Astral god. Buddhist.
The personification of Mrgadava in Sarnath near Varanasi where, after a
the planet Mercury. Stands on a lotus. Attributes: visit in 1956 by the
Dalai Lama, an enclosure of bow and arrow.

gazelles was erected.

**Bugid Y Aiba**

**Buddhabodhiprabhavasita** *(control of the* God of war. Puerto Rico
and Haiti. Classed as *light of the knowledge of the Buddha)* one of the
*ZEMIS.* The local Indians have believed Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of
a group of that the deity can give them strength. When they twelve
VASITAS personifying the disciplines of smoke in a ritual ceremony in
honor of the god, spiritual regeneration. Color: yellow. Attributes:
their arms increase in size. He will also restore prayer wheel on a
jeweled banner.

failed eyesight.

**Buddhakapala** *(Buddha's skullcap)* God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A
significant ema-Buk

nation of AKSOBHYA. Alternatively a form River goddess. Nuer \[Sudan\].
A guardian against of HERUKA. His SAKTI is CITRASENA. Color: attack by
crocodiles, she is invoked by the sacri-blue-black. Attributes: club,
cup, drum, image of fice of a goat. Known as the "daughter of the
Aksobhya and knife.

fireflies."

[]{#index_split_001.html#p72}**Buriyas** 57

**Buluc Chabtan**

**Buri**

God of war. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) Archetypal god. Nordic
(Icelandic). According to

\[Mexico\]. Associated with human sacrifice and Snorri, one of two
primordial beings. Ymir was depicted with a characteristic black line
encir-formed from the misty void of Ginnungagap, and cling the eye and
extending down the cheek.

Buri emerged from the blocks of salty ice on Also God F.

which the cosmic cow Audhumla fed. He had a son, BOR, who engendered the
AESIR gods OTHIN, VILI and VE. Also Bori.

**Bumba**

Creator god. Boshongo (Bantu) \[southern Africa\].

The progenitor of the world out of chaos. When **Buriyas**

he experienced stomachache he vomited the Tutelary war god. Kassite
\[Iran\]. He was invoked earth, sun, moon and, finally, all living
things, by the Kassite armies which overthrew Babylonia including
mankind.

in the sixteenth century BC.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p73}C

6

**Cacoch**

( *Samhain*) *.* She brings the snow until the goddess Creator god.
Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) BRIGIT deposes her and she eventually
turns to

\[Mexico\]. According to tradition he engendered stone on April 30 (
*Beltine*) *.* In later times the the water lily from which sprang all
the other mythical, witch-like figure of "Black Annis" prob-deities of
the Mayan pantheon. He is also por-ably derived from her.

trayed as a messenger of the creator god HACHACYUM. Also Kacoch.

**Cakra** *(wheel)*

Embodiment of the creator's mind. Hindu. Emerg-Caelestis

ing in the form of a six-spoked wheel (less fre-Moon goddess.
Carthaginian \[North Africa\]. The quently eight) which also epitomizes
the passage of Romanized form of the Punic goddess TANIT.

time, and is a symbol of wholeness and protection.

Elsewhere she became syncretized into the cult of Particularly
associated with VISŇU and KRSNA, the APHRODITE-VENUS. Annual games were
held in *cakra is* a common attribute held by many deities. It her
honor. She was brought to Rome in the form is probably of great
antiquity since it is known from of an abstract block of stone (like
that of KYBELE

the time of the Indus Valley civilization (prior to from Pessinus) and
became popular there during 1700 BC). In Jainism and Buddhism it is the
"wheel the early part of the third century AD; in this guise of the law"
which leads to perfection.

she was known as the "mighty protectress of the Tarpeian hill."

**Cakresvari** *(lady of the cakra)* Goddess of learning. Jain
\[India\]. One of sixteen **Cagn**

VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

Creator god. Kalahari bushmen \[southern Africa\].

Also one of the twenty-four SASANADEVATA or The progenitor of all life
on earth.

messenger goddesses.

**Cailleach Bheur**

**Camaxtli**

Goddess of winter. Celtic (Scottish). Depicted as God. Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

a blue-faced hag who is reborn on October 31

*See also* MIXCOATL-CAMAXTLI.

58

[]{#index_split_001.html#p74}**Candesvari** 59

**Camulos**

**Candanayika** *(mistress of the fierce)* War god. Celtic (British).
Probably the deity from Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A distinct
which the name of Camulodunum \[Colchester, form of DURGA and one of a
group of nine England\] derives. Known from inscriptions and NAVADURGAS
("nine durgas").

coinage bearing the symbol of a boar.

**Candarosana**

**Camunda**

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A form of the god 1. Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). A distinct AKSOBHYA. Color: yellow. Attributes: noose, skin
form of DURGA. The name is said to be a con-and sword.

traction of the names of the demonic beings Camda and Munda killed by
her. She is also recognized among the SAPTAMATARA and ASTAMATARA
**Candarupa**

mothers as well as sometimes being regarded as a Goddess. Hindu (Epic
and Puranic). A distinct NAVASAKTI. She stands variously on a lion, an
owl form of DURGA and one of a group of nine and a corpse. Attributes: a
large and varied assort-NAVADURGAS ("nine durgas").

ment of objects are held. Three-eyed. Also YAMI.

2\. Goddess. Buddhist. She stands upon a corpse.

Color: red. Attributes: cup and knife.

**Candavati**

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A distinct form of DURGA and one of a
group of nine **Canda** *(violent)*

NAVADURGAS ("nine durgas").

Terrible goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A distinct form of DURGA and
one of a group of nine NAVADURGAS ("nine durgas"). Canda, with
**Candelifera**

Munda, was also one of the demons killed by a Minor goddess of birth.
Roman. Responsible for form of Durga known as CAMUNDA (contraction
bringing the newborn child into the light. Usually of the two demonic
names). She is depicted with associated with LUCINA and CARMENTES.

a large number of attributes. Also a form of MAHISASURAMARDINI.

**Candesvara**

*(the lord of Canda)*

Minor god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A benevo-Candali *(outcast woman)*
lent aspect of SˇIVA. Also an attendant on Sˇiva, said Goddess of
terrifying appearance. Buddhist-to have been a youthful cowherd. He sits
on a lotus Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a group of eight *GAURI* throne.
Attributes: arrow, ax, bow, club, crown, goddesses. Color: red or blue.
Attributes: flames.

hatchet, noose, rosary, snake, trident and water jar.

**Candamius**

**Candesvari** *(fierce lady)* Astral god. Romano-Iberian. Known from
Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). She stands inscriptions and
place-names in northern Spain upon a corpse. Color: yellow. Attributes:
grass and syncretized with Jupiter.

and an antelope.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p75}60 **Candika**

**Candika** *(fierce)*

**Cao Guo-jiu**

Goddess of desire. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).

Immortal being. Taoist (Chinese). One of the May be included among the
SAPTAMATARAS or

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, he was ASTAMATARAS (mothers).

once a mortal being who achieved immortality through his lifestyle. The
tutelary god of actors.

Attributes include musical rattles or castanets.

**Candogra** *(fierce and terrible)* *See also* BA XIAN.

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A distinct form of DURGA and one of a
group of nine NAVADURGAS ("nine durgas").

**Carcika** *(repetitive chant)* Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Color:
red.

Attributes: cup and knife.

**Candra**

1\. Planet god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Personified by the moon and
also seen as a *dikpala* **Cariociecus**

or guardian of the northern direction. Consorts War god. Romano-Iberian.
Syncretized with the include KAUMUDI, TARA and the *NAKSATRAS* or god
MARS.

astral goddesses. His son is BUDHA. He drives in a chariot drawn by ten
white horses. Color: white. Attributes: club, lotus, sacred rope and
**Carmentes**

prayer wheel. The term *candra* usually refers to Minor goddess of
birth. Roman. Responsible for the cup containing the sacrificial yellow
bever-bringing the newborn child into the light. Usually age *SOMA,*
often a synonym for the deity. *Candra* associated with LUCINA and
CANDELIFERA.

is also the apotheosis of the pale yellow moon disc.

2\. Planet god. Buddhist. Attended by a **Cathubodua**

goose. Color: white. Attributes: moon disc on War goddess. Celtic
(Continental European).

a lotus.

Known only from inscriptions and probably comparable with the Irish
Celtic Badb Catha.

*See also* MORRIGAN.

**Candrasekhara** *(moon crested)* Form of the god SˇIVA. Hindu
(Puranic).

Portrayed standing stiffly upright and wearing **Caturmurti**

snake jewelry with the moon on the left God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).
The specific side of his headdress. Attributes: ax and an form of Visňu
with four faces. Also the syn-antelope.

cretization of BRAHMA, VISŇU, SˇIVA and Surya.

**Cankilikkaruppan**

*(the black man of the*

**Cauri**

*chain)*

Goddess of terrifying appearance. Buddhist Local god. Hindu-Dravidian
(Tamil). Worshiped and Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a group of eight in
southern India.

*GAURI* goddesses. Color: yellow. Attribute: noose.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p76}**CERNUNNOS** 61

**Cautha**

underworld PROSERPINA who was abducted by Sun god. Etruscan. Attributes
include a sun disc PLUTO. She became foster-mother to Triptole-crown and
fire in each hand. He is depicted rising mus, an ill-fated king in the
mold of the from the sea.

Mesopotamian Dumuzi, depicted in the classical Greek *Eleusinian
Mysteries.* As the embodiment of vegetation, Ceres neglects the natural
world dur-Ce Acatl

ing the period that her daughter remains below Minor creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoameri-ground with Pluto (winter), but restores nature
can) \[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively annually when
Proserpina is returned to her.

classed as the QUETZALCOATL complex. Also (1) Ceres was worshiped
through the festivals of Acatl.

*Thesmophoria* and *Cerealia* in sanctuaries throughout the Greco-Roman
empires.

**Cenkalaniyammal**

*(lady of the red paddyfield)* Local goddess. Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil).

**Ceridwen**

Guardian of paddyfields in southern India.

Goddess of inspiration. Celtic (Welsh). Depicted as the hag-aspect of
the mother goddess, she is the consort of TEGID FOEL. Her children are
**Centeocihuatl**

Creirwy (daughter) and Afagddu (son). She Maize goddess. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) allegedly prepares the caldron of knowledge.

\[Mexico\]. Represented at various sites including Tula \[Hidalgo\].
According to the codices *Borgia,* *Cospi* and *Fejervery-Mayer* she is
also one of four **CERNUNNOS**

temple deities. Also Centeotl.

**ORIGIN** Celtic (mainly Gallic). Fertility and chthonic god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times **CERES**

until circa AD 1000.

**ORIGIN** Roman. Mother goddess.

**SYNONYMS** none.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to AD

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none.

400\.

**ART REFERENCES** Gundestrup Bowl; monumen-SYNONYMS DEMETER (Greek).

tal stone work and relief carvings.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout Roman world.

**LITERARY SOURCES** votive inscriptions.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and reliefs.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Aeneid* (Virgil), etc.

Cernunnos appears to have been recognized in the region of Gaul which is
now central France.

Ceres is arguably the most recent model of the He is typically drawn as
a man bearing the antlers

"great mother" whose predecessors include INANA, of a stag, not
necessarily representing an animal ISŤAR, ARTEMIS, KYBELE and Demeter on
whom spirit but a deity closely involved with animals and she is
directly modeled. She is the daughter of one which can transform
instantly into animal KRONOS (Cronus) and RHEA and one of the more
shape. In the Celtic world, horns and antlers important consorts of
JUPITER. Her daughter in were generally regarded as symbols of virility
and the upper world, KORE, is the goddess of the fertility. On the
Celtic Gundestrup Bowl from

[]{#index_split_001.html#p77}62 **Cghene**

Denmark, Cernunnos is attended by a boar---an burning torches,
symbolizing their power to animal revered by the Celts for its speed,
pugnac-withhold as well as dispense rain.

ity and magical connotations---and on the same *See also* TLALOC.

vessel he seems to be associated with a bull. This latter link reappears
on a stone relief from Reims.

Cernunnos is also depicted in association with **Chac Uayab Xoc**

snakes, sometimes bearing rams' horns, as on a Fish god. Mayan (Yucatec,
classical Mesoameri-stone relief found at Cirencester in England. His
can) \[Mexico\]. Known as the "great demon shark,"

legs may be replaced by snakes, and at Sommere-he feeds on the bodies of
drowned fishermen, but court \[Haute Marne\] a relief was found
depicting also provides catches.

the god in company with an unnamed goddess holding a basket and feeding
a snake. The snake symbolism is generally associated with
rejuvena-Chaitanya

tion. Other reliefs show him holding purses of Mendicant god. Hindu
(Puranic). A deified money.

mortal who became one of the many incarnations of the god VISŇU. Born at
Nadiya in AD 1484, he died at Puri in 1527. Chaitanya was a sickly child
**Cghene**

who, according to legend, was left to his fate, Creator god. Isoko
\[southern Nigeria, West hanging in a tree to die, but was revived by
the Africa\]. An abstract being who is embodied by a gods and thus
became deified. He was married mediator in the form of a sacred wooden
totem, twice before adopting a strict ascetic existence at the *Oyise.*
The god has no temples or priests.

the age of twenty-four, from which time he traveled extensively,
eventually settling in the holy city of Benares. He is remembered as a
great **Chac**

social reformer. His main sanctuary at Nadiya Rain god(s). Mayan
(Yucatec, classical Mesoamer-includes a small statue of KRSNA to whom he
ican) \[Mexico\]. Not part of the hierarchy of devoted himself.

Mayan gods, but worshiped with great devotion at local level. Originally
there was a god, Chaac, who was of huge size and who taught mankind
**Chalchiuhtlatonal** *(jade glowing)* agriculture. He was regarded as
the god of thun-God of water. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) der,
lightning, rain and bread, and of *milpas*

\[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively classed as (smallholdings)
and their produce. Also God B.

the Tlaloc complex, generally concerned with Later, four leading Chacs
become recognized, rain, agriculture and fertility.

`</i>`{=html}

*each with different colors and directions. They are known popularly as
the Ah Hoyaob (sprin-klers or urinators), since the rain falls from
**CHALCHIUHTLICUE** *(her skirt is of* between their legs. They are
regarded as musi-jade)*

cians and their sacred animals are frogs and tor-ORIGIN Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

toises. Attributes include a long pendulous nose, Water goddess.

a scroll beneath the eye and a thin, ribbon-like **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 750 to object projecting from a corner of the mouth,
AD 1500 but probably much earlier.

which may be toothless. They may also hold **SYNONYMS** none.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p78}**Chang Hs'ien** 63

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** worshiped widely but chiefly **Chalmecatl**

at Teotihuacan.

Minor chthonic underworld god. Aztec (classical **ART REFERENCES** stone
sculptures, murals, codex Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the deities
illustrations.

collectively classed as the MICTLANTECUHTLI **LITERARY SOURCES**
pre-Columbian codices.

complex.

Featuring strongly in creation mythology, Chalchiuhtlicue presided over
the fourth of the **Chamer**

world ages which terminated in a great deluge.

God of death. Mayan (Chorti, classical Mesoamer-She is the tutelary
deity of the fourth of the thir-ican) \[eastern Guatemala\]. Appears as
a skeleton teen heavens identified at the time of the Spanish dressed in
white. His consort is Xtabai. Attributes conquest, Ilhuicatl Citlalicue
(the heaven of the include a scythe with a bone blade, probably copied
star-skirted goddess). She takes the role of a veg-from the traditions
of Christian immigrants.

etation goddess responsible for the flowering and fruiting of the green
world, particularly maize; she also takes responsibility for such
natural phenom-Chang Fei

ena as whirlpools. The consort of the rain god God of war. Chinese. The
counterpart of the god TLALOC and one of the group classed as the Tlaloc
KUAN TI and often linked iconographically with complex, she is
particularly invoked as a guardian him and the god LIU PEI, Chang Fei
rules over goddess of young women and is responsible for the dark half
of the year---autumn and winter.

unpredictable events. A huge statue, three meters Like the seasons he
represents he is character-high, was discovered at Teotihuacan, and a
larger, ized by drunkenness and wildness. According to unfinished
statue, allegedly of the goddess and tradition he was wounded by his
subordinates weighing approximately 200 tons (now in Mexico while in a
drunken stupor. He is depicted with a City), was found on the slopes of
the Tlaloc black face, a bushy beard and wild staring eyes mountain.
Attributes include a rattle on a baton, giving him a ferocious
appearance.

and her dress is adorned with waterlilies.

**Chang Hs'ien**

**Chalchiutonatiuh**

Aztec. See ATL.

Guardian god of children. Chinese. According to tradition he was the
mortal king of Szechuan killed by the founder of the Sung dynasty. His
**Chalchiutotolin** *(jade turkey)* wife was captured and forced to
become a concu-God of penitence. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) bine in
the imperial palace. She was discovered by

\[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively classed as the emperor
kneeling before a picture of her the TEZCATLIPOCA complex.

deceased husband which she identified as a local deity, "the immortal
Chang who gives children."

This triggered the cult which began locally in **Chalmecacihuilt**
*(chalman lady)* Szechuan circa AD 100. Chang Hs'ien is depicted Minor
chthonic underworld goddess. Aztec holding a bow made of mulberry wood
and either (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the aiming an
arrow at the star Tien Kou, the so-deities collectively classed as the
MICTLANTE-called celestial dog which threatens the earth, or CUHTLI
complex.

aiming the empty bow at a rat (see ERH LANG).

[]{#index_split_001.html#p79}64 **Chang Tao Ling** **Chang Tao Ling**

**Charis**

God of the afterlife. Taoist (Chinese). The head Minor goddess. Greek.
The consort of HEPHAIS-of the heavenly Ministry of Exorcism, and TOS.
Later the name becomes more familiar as the allegedly the first head of
the Taoist church. By GRATIAE or Graces (Aglaia, Euphrosine and
tradition he vanquished the five poisonous ani-Thalea) who then become
the Charites in the mals---the centipede, scorpion, snake, spider and
Roman pantheon.

toad---placing their venom in a flask in which he concocted the elixir
of life. Having drunk the contents at the age of 123, he ascended to
**Chattrosnisa**

*(with an umbrella)*

heaven. He is depicted riding upon a tiger and God. Buddhist. One of
eight USNISA deities appar-brandishing a sword. Before the communist
ently connected with the guardian sky deities or takeover of China, the
gods of exorcism lived in *dikpalas.* Color: white. Attribute: parasol.

a sanctuary on the Dragon Tiger mountain in Kiangsi province. Exorcised
spirits were trapped in jars which were stored in the cellars.

**Chaya** *(shadow)*

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The reflection of the goddess SANJNA,
consort of SURYA and **Chantico** *(in the house)* mother of the astral
deity SANI.

Hearth goddess. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. A household guardian deity personified by hearth fires. One
of the deities collectively **Chemosh**

See KEMOS.

classed as the XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

**Chi Sung Tzu**

**Chaob**

*(carrying off)*

Rain god. Chinese.

Wind god(s). Mayan (Lacandon, classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. They
live in the four cardinal directions and, according to **Chibirias**

tradition, will bring about the end of the Chthonic earth goddess. Mayan
(classical current world with earthquakes and tempests Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. The consort of the cre-when the last of the Lacandon people
dies.

ator god ITZAM NA and the mother of the They will blow so hard that they
blast the BACABS. She sends the rain for Itzam Na and, as monkeys out of
the trees. The names of two an iguana, is said to have flooded the world
in a are identified, Hunaunic in the east and previous cycle. She also
paints the earth, the Chikinkuh in the West.

leaves of certain plants and the crest of the woodpecker red with her
paintbrush. She invented the art of weaving and is the patroness of
weavers.

**Chaos**

Attributes include a hank of cotton or cloth. Also Primordial deity.
Greco-Roman. The amorphous IX CHEBEL YAX; Ix Hun Tah Dz'ib (lady unique
male power who, with the female presence, NYX, owner of the paintbrush);
Ix Hun Tah Nok (lady personifies the empty space which existed before
unique owner of the cloth); IX ZACAL NOK (lady the formation of the
cosmos.

cloth-weaver).

[]{#index_split_001.html#p80}**Chu Jung** 65

**Chiccan**

**Chiconahui Itzcuintli-Chantico** Rain gods. Mayan (Chorti, classical
Mesoameri-God of lapidiaries. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[eastern
Guatemala\]. Giant reptilian deities can) \[Mexico\].

whose blood is cold and who evolved from snakes. They form a quartet,
each living at the bottom of a deep lake situated in the four
cardi-Chikara

nal directions. They are believed to churn the Sky god. Korekore
(Shona-speaking) \[northern waters which rise as clouds. The AH PATNAR

Zimbabwe, southern Africa\]. He has a son, UINICOB gods then beat the
rain from the clouds NOSENGA.

with stone axes.

**Chinnamastaka**

*(decapitated)*

**Chicomecohuatl**

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A headless Maize goddess. Aztec and
postclassical Meso-form of DURGA. Also one of a group of ten american.
\[Mexico\]. Her festival was held in Sep-MAHAVIDYAS, goddesses of great
knowledge tember when a young girl was sacrificed having personifying
the SAKTI of SˇIVA. She may be taken on the role of the deity for a
period of time depicted holding her head in her hands. Aspects during
the celebrations. She was decapitated on a include VIRARATRI.
Attributes: scimitar, skull.

heap of maize fruits and her blood was collected Also Chinnamasta.

in a large bowl before being poured over a wooden figurine of the
goddess. Finally the victim's skin was flayed off and worn by a dancing
**Chiuke**

priest.

Sky god. Ibo \[Nigeria, West Africa\]. Regarded as *See also* XILONEN.

a creator god.

**Chicomexochitl**

**Chors**

God of painters. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Sun god. Pre-Christian
Slav \[Balkans\]. Identified

\[Mexico\]. Also described as a god of solar pleasure.

from the *Nestor Chronicle.* Attributes include horns and a canine head.

**Chiconahui**

Hearth goddess. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) **Chos-Skyon**

*(protector)*

\[Mexico\]. A household guardian deity personi-Tutelary guardian deity.
Buddhist-Lamaist fied by hearth fires. One of the deities collectively

\[Tibet\]. One of a group of gods of fearsome classed as the
XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

appearance who wear royal apparel. Rides a white elephant. Color: blue.
Attributes: knife and noose.

**Chiconahuiehecatl**

Minor creator god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the
deities collectively **Chu Jung**

classed as the QUETZALCOATL complex.

God of fire. Chinese. Also the heavenly executioner.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p81}66 **Chul Tatic Chites Vaneg** **Chul Tatic
Chites Vaneg**

*(holy father,*

**SYNONYMS** none.

*creator of man)*

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specific.

Creator god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) **ART REFERENCES** codex
illustrations, stone

\[Mexico\]. Thought to be the Mayan name of the carvings.

Christian god.

**LITERARY SOURCES** pre-Columbian codices.

Not strictly a goddess, but significant enough in **Chung K'uei**

Aztec cosmogony to be included here. According to God of the afterlife.
Taoist (Chinese). He belongs tradition she was created in the form of a
huge alli-to the heavenly "ministry of exorcism" and, gator-like monster
by the underworld deities though not the most senior (he is subservient
to MICTLANTECUHLTI and MICTECACIHUATL. She CHANG TAO LING), is probably
the most popular may equate with TLALTECUHTLI, the toad-like within the
category. He was originally a mortal earth monster torn apart to form
heaven and earth.

working as a physician in the eighth century AD.

According to one tradition she emerged from the He is depicted with a
fearsome face, said to be so primordial waters and engaged in a fierce
struggle terrible that it can drive away any demonic spirit with the sun
god TEZCATLIPOCA during which he who dares to oppose him. He is engaged
in com-tore off her lower jaw to prevent her sinking back bat using a
sword and a fan on which is written a into the depths and she bit off
his right foot. The magical formula to ward off evil. Symbolic mountains
are said to be the scaly ridges of her skin.

peaches are suspended from his hat and a bat circles his head
representing happiness.

**Cipactonal**

Creator god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) **Cihuacoatl-Quilaztli**

\[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively classed as Creator goddess.
Aztec (classical Mesomerican) the OMETEOTL complex.

\[Mexico\]. Using a magical vessel, she grinds bone fragments obtained
from previous generations of **Cit Chac Coh**

mankind in earlier world ages into a powder. The God of war. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) gods then commit self-sacrifice, allowing their

\[Mexico\]. Identified as a red puma.

blood to drip into the vessel. From the resulting mix, the human race of
the fifth sun is formed.

**Citlalatonac** *(glowing star)* Creator god. Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) **Cinxia**

\[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively classed Minor goddess of
marriage. Roman. Concerned as the OMETEOTL complex. His consort is with
the proper dress of the bride.

CITLALICUE. Between them they created the stars of the night sky.

**CIPACTLI** *(great earth mother)* **ORIGIN** Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

**Citlalicue** *(her skirt is a star)* Primordial goddess.

Creator goddess. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 750 until

\[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively classed as AD 1500, but
probably much earlier.

the Ometeotl complex. Her consort is Citlala-

[]{#index_split_001.html#p82}**COATLICUE** 67

tonac. Between them they created the stars of the absolute use of power.
Under Hadrian the term night sky.

*clementia temporum* (mildness of the times) came into common usage.

**Citra** *(bright)*

Minor goddess of misfortune. Hindu (epic and **COATLICUE**

*(the serpent-skirted goddess)* Puranic). A malevolent *NAKSATRA* or
astral deity; **ORIGIN** Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

Mother goddess.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 750 to AD

1500 and probably much earlier.

**Citrasena**

*(having a bright spear)*

**SYNONYMS** Coatlicue-Chimalman (Valley of Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). The SAKTI of Mexico).

BUDDHAKAPALA.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Tenochtitlan.

**ART REFERENCES** stone sculptures, murals, codex **Cittavasita**

illustrations.

*(control of thinking)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of **LITERARY SOURCES**
pre-Columbian codices.

twelve VASITAS personifying the disciplines of spir-The creator goddess
of the earth and mankind itual regeneration. Color: white. Attribute:
staff.

and the female aspect of OMETEOTL. One of the group classed as the
TETEOINNAN complex. She **Cizin**

*(stench)*

has 400 sons, the stars of the southern sky, and is God of death. Mayan
(Yucatec and other tribes, the mother of the goddess COYOLXAUHQUI.

classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The most Later, as a widow, she was
impregnated by a ball important death god in the Mayan cultural area.

of feathers as she was sweeping the "serpent Said to live in Metnal, the
Yucatec place of death, mountain" of Coatepec near Tula. Her other
chil-and to burn the souls of the dead. He first burns the dren
decapitated her as punishment for her dis-mouth and anus and, when the
soul complains, honor, but she gave birth to the sun god douses it with
water. When the soul complains of HUITZILOPOCHTLI who subsequently slew
Coy-this treatment, he burns it again until there is noth-olxauhqui and
her brothers, thus banishing night ing left. It then goes to the god
Sicunyum who spits for day. The Great Temple at Tenochtitlan com-on his
hands and cleanses it, after which it is free to memorates this
primordial battle.

go where it chooses. Attributes of Cizin include a Coatlicue is known
iconographically from a fleshless nose and lower jaw, or the entire head
may colossal headless statue dated to the late Aztec be depicted as a
skull. Spine and ribs are often period, circa AD 1300, which stands in
Mexico showing. He wears a collar with death eyes between City. The
hands and feet are clawed and the fig-lines of hair and a long bone
hangs from one ear-ure bears a necklace of human hands and hearts lobe.
His body is painted with black and particularly with a skull pendant. A
skirt is formed from yellow spots (the Mayan color of death).

snakes and two snakes arising from the neck meet to form a face. Down
her back hang thirteen leather cords festooned with snails.
Accord-Clementia

ing to tradition Coatlicue feeds off human Minor goddess. Roman.
Generally invoked to corpses. She is also recognized as the patron
protect the common man against the emperor's deity of florists.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p83}68 **Coca-Mama** **Coca-Mama**

**Colop U Uichkin**

*(tears out the eye of the sun)* Goddess of the coca plant. South
American Sky god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-Indian \[Peru\].
Minor goddess who oversees the ico\]. Said to live in the midst of the
sky, but with harvest of the coca crop. Models of the deity were a night
*avatara* of the same name who lives in the made from the leaves of the
plant and kept for a underworld land of the dead, Metnal, and who is
year before being burned in a ritual to ensure a the bringer of disease.

good coca harvest.

**Condatis**

**Cocidius**

River god. Celtic (British). Northern British deity Hunting goddess.
Celtic (British). Northern with stone votive inscriptions located in
County British deity depicted in stone relief at Rising-Durham.

ham (Yorkshire).

**Contrebis**

**Cocijo**

Local god. Romano-Celtic (British). Identified Rain god. Zapotec
(classical Mesoamerican) from an inscription at Lancaster in conjunction

\[Mexico\]. Known to have been worshiped by the with another deity,
IALONUS.

Monte Alban culture of Zapotec-speaking peoples in the Valley of Oaxaca.

**Corus**

**Co(co)chimetl**

*(soporific)*

God of wind. Roman. Specifically the deity Minor god of merchants and
commerce. Aztec responsible for the northwest winds.

(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the deities collectively
classed as the YACATECUHTLI complex.

**COVENTINA**

**ORIGIN** Romano-Celtic (British). Tutelary and water goddess of
uncertain affinities.

**Col**

*(black one)*

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 200 BC until Rain god. Nuer \[Sudan\].
He brings rain AD 500 or later.

and thunderstorms. Souls of people killed by **SYNONYMS** none known.

lightning have been described as *colwic*. Also **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
sacred spring near the Chol.

Roman fort of Brocolitia \[Carrawburgh\] on Hadrian's Wall.

**ART REFERENCES** monumental carvings and bas **Colel Cab**

*(mistress of the earth)*

reliefs.

Chthonic earth goddess. Mayan (classical **LITERARY SOURCES** monumental
inscriptions.

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. This may be another title for the IX ZACAL NOK
aspect of the goddess Little is known of Coventina other than that
CHIBIRIAS.

she was a purely local British goddess of some

[]{#index_split_001.html#p84}**Cybele** 69

importance. She is best observed from the period suggests his sister was
an ally whom he was unable of the Roman occupation, at which time she to
save, so he decapitated her and threw her head shows a classical
influence but is clearly Celtic in into the sky, where she became the
moon. She was origin. On one bas relief found at Carrawburgh represented
in the Great Temple at Tenochtitlan, her name is associated with three
nymphs hold-where she was depicted in front of successive ing vessels
with issuing streams of water; on Huitzilopochtli pyramids. She is also
a hearth another she is pictured as a water nymph on a deity within the
group classed as the XIUHTE-leaf, pouring water from a vessel. Her
Carraw-CUHTLI complex.

burgh sanctuary, which followed a simple, unroofed design similar to
that of a small Romano-Celtic temple, was sited beside a well **Cratos**

fed by a sacred spring and was associated with the God of strength.
Greek. See KRATOS.

Roman fort of Brocolitia. The well attests to a cult involving a ritual
shaft and water, into which more than 13,000 Roman coins had been thrown
**Cum Hau**

dating to the reign of Gratian (AD 407), indicat-Chthonic god of death.
Mayan (classical ing Coventina's long-standing popularity.

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of several names Incense-burners to
"Coventina Augusta" have for a death god listed in the codices.

been discovered from the late period.

In addition to money, pearls and pins were thrown into the well as
votive offerings, the pins **Cunda**

possibly implying a role in childbirth. Models of Goddess. Buddhist
\[eastern Bengal and Tibet\].

a dog (linked to the Greco-Roman physician Aes-An emanation of
Vajrasattva or Vairocana. A culapius) and a horse (a distinct fertility
symbol) female BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-designate. Also had also been
deposited. Less significant and seen separately as a deification of
literature, one probably dumped when the temple was dese-of a group of
twelve DHARANIS *.* She may stand crated by Christians were a skull,
altars and other upon a man. Color: white or green. Very large carved
stones. There is no evidence of connection variety of attributes. Also
Aryacunda.

with a severed head cult.

**Cunina**

**Coyolxauhqui** *(golden bells)* Minor goddess of infants. Roman.
Responsible Astral goddess. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) for guarding
the cradle.

\[Mexico\]. A deification and incarnation ( *avatara*) of the moon.
According to tradition she is the half-sister of the sun god
HUITZILOPOCHTLI. The **Cupid**

See AMOR.

god sprang, fully armed, from his decapitated mother, COATLICUE, and
engaged all his enemies who, by inference, are the 400 astral gods, his
**Cybele**

half-brothers. He slew his sister and hurled her Mother goddess.
Romanized name.

from the top of a mountain. Alternative tradition *See also* KYBELE.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p85}D

6

**Dabog**

ognized in parts of Mesopotamia where he Sun god. Slav \[Balkans and
southern Russia\].

acquired the consort Sˇalasˇ. Worshiped mainly at References found in
inscriptions from Kiev. After Gaza and Asďod, but also the supreme god
of the Christianization he was reduced to a diabolic Philistines. Known
in biblical references as personality.

Dagon (Judges 16.23). Mentioned in the apoc-ryphal *Book of Maccabees.*
The cult is thought to have continued until circa 150 BC. Israelite
**Dadimunda**

misinterpretation of the Ugaritic root Dagan led Tutelary god.
Singhalese Buddhist \[Sri Lanka\].

to the assumption that he was a fish god, therefore An attendant on the
god UPULVAN to whom he attributes include a fish tail.

acted as treasurer. The guardian of Buddhism in Sri Lanka. His sacred
animal is an elephant. Also Devata bandara.

**Dagan (3)**

Local supreme god. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. This god bears no relation to
the Semitic god Dagan, but **Dagan (1)**

is known by several synonyms including Dagon, Grain and fertility god.
Mesopotamian (Baby-Doghan and Deogan. He has been identified in
lonian-Akkadian). Generally linked with ANU in several villages in the
south of the Kafir region giving status to cities e.g. the dedications
by the

\[southern Nuristan\]. "Dagan" may be less a ninth-century BC Assyrian
king Assur-nasir-apli proper name than a title of respect.

at Kalakh. Cult centers existed at Tuttul and Terqa.

**DAGDA** *(the good god)* **ORIGIN** Celtic (Irish). Father of the
tribe.

**Dagan (2)**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from prehistoric Grain and fertility god.
Western Semitic times until after Christianization circa AD 400.

(Canaanite and Phoenician). The father of BAAL

**SYNONYMS** Ruad ro-fhessa (lord of perfect knowin Ugaritic creation
epics. A major sanctuary was ledge); Eochaid Ollathair (all-father).

built in his honor at Mari \[Syria\] and he was rec-CENTER(S) OF CULT
Tara, etc.

70

[]{#index_split_001.html#p86}**Damkina** 71

**ART REFERENCES** possibly various stone carvings, He also holds a
hammer in his right hand. In Romano-Celtic and earlier.

depictions there is often a mouse nibbling at **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions; Cycles of* one of the rice bales. Small gold icons
of the god *Kings.*

may be carried as talismans of wealth. According to tradition, when
Daikoku's hammer is The Dagda is a strictly Irish tribal god not found
shaken, money falls out in great profusion. In among the Continental
Celts. He is regarded in western Japan he is also syncretized with the a
general sense as the protector and benefactor of god of rice paddies,
TA-NO-KAMI, and thus the people, not "good" in a moral sense but in a
becomes the god of agriculture and farmers. He practical fashion---"good
at anything." A father may have developed from the Buddhist god figure
who led the deities of Ireland against the MAHAKALA.

Fir Bolg in the First Battle of Moytura (see TUATHA DE DANANN). He has
no exclusive roles, but in mythology enters a ritualized union with
**Daksa** *(skilled and able)* fertility goddesses including MORRIGAN
and Sun god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). The son of BOANN. He is the
father of BRIGIT and of AENGUS

BRAHMA and ADITI, he is an ADITYA and demi-Mac Oc (young god). Dagda is
represented in lit-urge. His consort is PRASUTI, and he is said to
erature as possessing immense strength and a have had up to sixty
daughters. He appears in prodigious appetite ( *see also* THOR). Drawn
by conflict with his son-in-law SˇIVA as the main Christian writers as a
boorish and grotesque char-offender against Sˇiva's consort SATI
(accounted as acter, which may be inaccurate, his weapon is a one of his
daughters), who was so insulted by huge club which can slay nine men at
a stroke Daksa that she committed suicide by jumping and which was once
drawn on a ceremonial cart.

into a ritual fire. Sˇiva took revenge by decapitat-He owns a bronze
"caldron of abundance" with ing Daksa but later, after intercession from
other magical properties of wisdom and rejuvenation, gods, Brahma
brought him back to life, giving symbol of Irish prosperity. The Dagda
may him the substitute head of a sacrificial goat.

be the subject of a vast naked figure armed with Attribute: head of a
goat. Also PRAJAPATI.

a club cut in chalk at Cerne Abbas in Dorset, England, and probably
created during the Romano-Celtic period.

**Damgalnuna**

Mother goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). She
first appears as a con-Dagon

See DAGAN (2).

sort of ENLIL and, as Mesopotamian traditions progress, becomes
associated with EA and the mother of the Babylonian god MARDUK. Also
**Daikoku**

DAMKINA (Akkadian).

God of luck. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of seven gods of fortune in Shintoism
and often linked with the god EBISU. Originally a god of kitchens, he
**Damkina**

became a deity concerned with happiness. He is Goddess. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian).

depicted as a fat, well-to-do figure seated on Consort of Ea.

two rice bales and carrying a sack on his back.

*See also* DAMGALNUNA.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p87}72 **Danaparamita** **Danaparamita**

linked with the *Daphnephoria* festivals honoring Philosophical deity.
Buddhist. One of twelve APOLLO. Tradition has it that she was changed
into PARAMITA deities and a spiritual offspring of RAT-the laurel to
avoid sexual submission to the god.

NASAMBHAVA. Color: reddish white. Attributes: an ear of rice and a
banner with pearl.

**Daramulum**

Creator god. Australian aboriginal. Otherwise **DANU (1)**

known as Gayandi he is the son of BAIAME and **ORIGIN** Celtic (Irish).
Founding goddess.

BIRRAHGNOOLOO and is worshiped principally by **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** prehistoric times the Wiradyuri and Kamilaroi groups of
aborig-until after Christianization circa AD 400.

ines in the southeast of Australia, who regard him **SYNONYMS** ANU; DON
(Welsh).

as an intermediary between his father, the **CENTER(S) OF CULT** various
sanctuaries.

supreme being, and the human race. To an extent **ART REFERENCES** none
known.

this role may have developed through Christian **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions; Cycles of* missionary influence.

*Kings; History of Races* etc; *Mabinogion* (Welsh).

Danu is the leader and progenitress of the Irish **Darawigal**

pantheon, the TUATHA DE DANANN. Otherwise Personification of evil.
Australian aboriginal. This she is a remote and barely defined figure.
She demonic deity stands opposed to BAIAME, the cre-equates closely with
the Welsh goddess Don and ator spirit who represents good in the world.
He may have been perceived originally as a fertility is generally
recognized as an offspring of Baiame and vegetation spirit.

who once lived in the sky but fell from grace during the Dreamtime and
was sent to the underworld as its ruler. From there he now dispenses
**Danu (2)**

death and sickness.

Primordial goddess. Hindu (Vedic). The word Danu is used to describe the
primeval waters and this deity is probably their embodiment. She is
**Datin**

known as the mother of the demonic personality God. Pre-Islamic northern
Arabian. Frequently VRTRA, who engages in combat with, and is mentioned
in inscriptions, but of uncertain defeated by, the rain god INDRA. In
later Hin-function.

duism she is perceived as a daughter of DAKSA and the consort of
KASYAPA.

**Daya** *(compassion)*

Goddess. Hindu (Puranic) A SAKTI of Acyuta **Daphne**

(never falling), a minor aspect of the god VISŇU.

Oracular goddess. Greek. A number of oracular shrines were dedicated to
her in various places in Asia Minor, including Antiocheia, Mopsuestia
**Decima**

(Cilicia), Sura and Patara (Lycia), Telmessos Goddess of birth. Roman.
Generally linked with (Caria). Represented by the laurel *Daphne* she is
the goddess NONA, she is responsible for watching

[]{#index_split_001.html#p88}**Dena** 73

over the critical months of gestation. In later The legends of Demeter
and Persephone times the two were joined by the goddess of account for
seasons of dearth and growth in the death, MORTA, to form of trio of
fate goddesses, fields. Persephone, daughter of Demeter and the PARCAE.

ZEUS, gathers flowers in a meadow surrounded by attendant OKEANIDES. As
she picks one particular bloom the earth opens and the under-Dedwen

world god, Hades, abducts her. Demeter God of riches and incense.
Nubian. Virtually searches the world for her daughter and neg-unknown
Egyptianized deity to whom sanctuar-lects its prosperity in so doing.
The gods, seeing ies were dedicated by Tuthmosis III and who may that
catastrophe beckons, intervene and HER-have brought gifts from southern
regions.

MES is sent to fetch the girl. There are condi-Usually found in
anthropomorphic form but tions attached to her release, however, because
occasionally depicted as a lion. Also Dedun.

she has tasted the pomegranate of Hades and is thus bound to the
underworld. She may only enter the air above for nine months of the
year.

**DEMETER** *(mother)*

For the remaining three she must return and **ORIGIN** Greek. Vegetation
and mother goddess.

live as mistress of Hades.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from circa 800 BC

One of the most reasonable interpretations of but probably earlier until
Christianization the legend is that the three months when Perse-

(circa AD 400).

phone or Kore is in absence represent the three **SYNONYMS** Damater
(Dorian).

dry summer months when vegetation in the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
throughout Greek world Mediterranean region shrivels away and when
including Agrigentum, Cnidos, Priene, Gela, traditionally the grain was
stored in underground Siris and Lokroi. Particularly at Eleusis.

silos. When the rains come in autumn the youth-ART REFERENCES various
sculptures; terracottas ful aspect of Demeter returns. There are strong
showing votary priestesses holding piglets.

parallels with Mesopotamian and Hittite-Hur-LITERARY

**SOURCES** *Hymn to Demeter* and rian legend (see INANA and DUMUZI;
HEBAT and *Theogony* (Hesiod).

TELEPINU).

The Demeter cult was practiced in many Demeter displays a complex
personality which places, often with a high degree of secrecy and may be
the result of syncretization in prehis-with initiation rituals. Arguably
the most famous toric times between a goddess of the corn and cult
center is Eleusis, where the legends provided one of the underworld. By
Homeric times a stimulus for the *Eleusinian Mysteries*. There also
Demeter was a goddess of vegetation and death.

took place a women's festival of *Thesmophoria*, In ancient Athens the
dead were titled *deme-when pigs were buried alive in pits or *megara*.*

*treioi* and corn was traditionally scattered on The sacrifice of young
virgins to Demeter is new graves. Demeter undergoes a yearly
con-reported but unsubstantiated.

flict with HADES and a search for her lost daughter, or arguably her
alter ego, since the personality of the missing maiden goddess **Dena**

PERSEPHONE or KORE (girl) is virtually inextri-Goddess. Persian
\[Iran\]. The daughter of the god cable from that of Demeter.

of light AHURA MAZDA.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p89}74 **Deng**

**Deng**

**Devananda** *(delight of the gods)* Sky god. Nuer and Dinka \[Sudan\].
Considered to Goddess. Jain \[India\]. The mother of Mahavira.

be a foreign deity in the Nuer pantheon and a bringer of disease. His
daughter is the moon goddess. In Dinka religion he is a storm and
fertility **Devapurohita**

god bringing lightning and rain.

Astral god. Hindu (Puranic). An epithet for the planet god JUPITER.

**Dercetius**

Mountain god. Romano-Iberian.

**Devasena** *(heavenly host)* Goddess. Hindu (Puranic). One of the
consorts of SKANDA who normally stands to his left.

**Derceto**

Attribute: lotus in the left hand.

Mother goddess. Western Semitic (Phoenician).

Derived from the Syrian model of ATARGATIS and worshiped locally.

**Deverra**

Minor goddess of birth. Roman. A guardian of newborn children.
Symbolized by a broom used **Deva** *(the god)*

to sweep away evil influences.

Generic name of a god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). Originally, in the *Rg
Veda,* thirty or thirty-three *devas* are indicated, divided into
**Devi**

*(the goddess)*

three groups of eleven. In later Hinduism, the Goddess epitomizing the
active female principle.

term *deva is* generally applied to deities not Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). Devi evolved as a major included in the chief triad of BRAHMA,
VISŇU

goddess out of the older notion of mother and veg-and SˇIVA.

etation goddesses. She is seen more as an abstract principle who will
nevertheless respond directly to worshipers' prayers. By the fifth
century AD she **Devaki** *(divine)*

appears in many forms as the active (feminine) Mother goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic).

aspect or power of male deities. General attributes: Daughter of Devaka
and consort of the mythical conch, hook, noose, prayer wheel and
trident. Devi king VASUDEVA, Devaki bore eight sons, includis also the
generic name given to a female deity, in ing KRSNA and BALARAMA. Her
brother Kamsa her capacity as the consort of a god or *DEVA.*

believed that the eighth child would kill him and *See also* SRI(DEVI),
BHUMIDEVI.

he slaughtered the first six sons. In order to save the remaining two,
VISŇU implanted the "seed"

of his *avataras* in Devaki's womb (in the form of **Dhanada**

hairs from his head), before transferring Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana).
One of the ema-Balarama to the womb of the goddess ROHINI nations of the
*DHYANIBUDDHA* AMOGHASIDDHI, also and Krsna to Yasoda, the wife of a
cowherd, a form of the goddess TARA. She sits upon a moon Nanda.

throne with an unnamed animal in attendance.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p90}**Dharmadhatuvagisvara** 75

Color: green. Attributes: book, blue lotus, image of short mystical
religious text used as a charm.

of Amoghasiddhi, noose and rosary.

Also *dharini.*

**Dhanistha** *(very rich)* **DHARMA**

*(justice)*

Minor goddess of misfortune. Hindu (Puranic).

**ORIGIN** Hindu \[India\].

A malevolent *NAKSATRA* or astral deity; daughter **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 300 until of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA). Also
present.

SRAVISTHA.

**SYNONYMS** Dharme.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specific.

**ART REFERENCES** stone and metal sculptures.

**Dhanvantari** *(traveling through an arc)* **LITERARY**

**SOURCES** epic

texts including

Sun god. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). In later *Ramayana* and
*Mahabharata;* Puranic texts, but tradition a minor incarnation or
*avatara* of the also see the *Rg Veda.*

god VISŇU, also closely associated with medicine.

In Vedic mythology Dhanvantari carried the The god of law who originates
as a creator god ambrosia created from the primeval ocean of milk.

and one of the sons of Brahma, but almost cer-He brought medical science
to mankind. Only as tainly derives from the *dharmas* or archetypal
pat-the religion evolved did he become identified as terns of society
identified in the *Rg Veda*.

an *avatara.* As KANTATMAN (PRADYUMNA), he is According to tradition he
is the consort of thir-thought to be Kama reincarnated after his death
at teen daughters of DAKSA and the father of Yud-the hands of SˇIVA.
Various other epithets and exis-histhra. Also regarded as a minor
*avatara* of tences are attributed to this deity. Offerings are VISŇU,
appearing as a bull standing for the due to him at dusk in the
northeastern quarter. He redemption of souls.

is the guardian deity of hospitals which are usually In Bengali
tradition Dharme (probably of the in the vicinity of a sanctuary of
Visňu. Attributes: same derivation) has been annually engaged in a two
bowls containing ambrosia. Also Kantatman.

sacred marriage to the earth at the time of year when a tree known as
the *sal* is blossoming. Birds are sacrificed in a sacred grove after
which the **Dhara** *(supporting)*

tribe repairs to the hut of the village *shaman* and Attendant god.
Hindu (Puranic). One of a group the marriage is enacted between the
priest and his of eight VASU deities answering to the god INDRA.

wife, followed by a sexual free-for-all.

Attributes: lotus, plough, rosary and spear.

**Dharmadhatuvagisvara**

**Dharani**

*(earth)*

God of the law. Buddhist. A variety of MANJUSRI 1. Goddess. Hindu (Epic
and Puranic). Consort and therefore an emanation of AMITABHA. Color: of
PARASURAMA and an *avatara* of the goddess reddish-white. Attributes:
arrow, bell, book, LAKSMI.

bow, hook, image of Amitabha on crown, staff, 2. Collective name for a
group of deities. Bud-sword and water jar. Depicted with four heads
dhist. Twelve personifications of a particular kind and setting the law
wheel in motion.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p91}76 **Dharmakirtisagaraghosa**
**Dharmakirtisagaraghosa**

*(sound of the*

**Dhatar**

*(creator)*

*ocean of the glory of the law)* Sun god. Hindu (Puranic). An original
Vedic list Physician god. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

of six descendants of the goddess ADITI or Accounted among one of a
series of medicine Adityas, all of whom take the role of sun gods
*buddhas* known as a SMAN-BLA in Lamaism. Typ-was, in later times,
enlarged to twelve, including ically depicted with stretched earlobes.
Color: red.

Dhatar. Color: golden. Attributes: two lotuses, lotus rosary and
waterjar. Also Dhatr.

**Dharmamegha**

*(cloud of the law)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of **Dhisana**

twelve deified BHUMIS recognized as different Minor goddess of
prosperity. Hindu (Vedic).

spiritual spheres through which a disciple passes.

Associated with the acquisition of wealth. Also Color: blue. Attributes:
book and staff.

the name given to a bowl of fermented drink or *soma.*

**Dharmapala**

Collective name for a group of eight tutelary **Dhrtarastra**

*(his empire is firm)*

deities. Buddhist and particularly Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Minor god. Buddhist. One of the *dikpalas* or They wear royal apparel
but are of terrible appear-guardians of the easterly direction. Color:
white.

ance and are considered to be the guardians of the Attribute: lute.

law. General attributes: ax, cup, knife and snake.

**Dhrti**

*(firmness)*

**Dharmapratisamvit** *(analysis of nature)* Goddess. Jain \[India\]. A
minor deity with no sig-Goddess of nature analysis. Buddhist
(Vajrayana).

nificant role or attributes.

One of a group of four PRATISAMVITS. Color: whitish-red. Attributes:
noose and staff with crook.

**Dhruva**

*(immovable)*

Astral god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The son of **Dharmavasita**

*(control of law)*

Uttanapada, a star in the constellation of Ursa Minor goddess. Buddhist.
One of a group of Minor which was the pole star in the last
millen-twelve VASITAS personifying the disciplines of nium BC. An
*avatara* of VISŇU. Also one of a spiritual regeneration. Color: white.
Attributes: group of Vasu deities answering to the god INDRA.

water jar on a red lotus.

In different context, the description of a kind of fixed icon.
Attributes: prayer wheel, rosary, spear and water jar.

**Dharti Mata**

Mother goddess. Hindu (Puranic). A deity who appears late in Hinduism
and equates with **Dhumavati** *(smoky)*

PRTHIVI or BHUMIDEVI. According to some Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). One of a authors she is the consort of THAKUR DEO. Also group
of ten MAHAVIDYAS personifying the Dhartri Mai, Darti Awwal.

SAKTI of SˇIVA. Aspects include Darunaratri

[]{#index_split_001.html#p92}**DIANCECHT** 77

(night of frustration), who is also regarded as southwestern quarter.
Color: reddish-blue.

one of the personifications of the goddess Sakti.

Attributes: banner with jewel.

**Dhumorna** *(smoke)*

**Dhyanaparamita** *(perfection in meditation)* Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). The con-Philosophical deity. Buddhist. A PARAMITA and sort of
YAMA. Attribute: a pomegranate.

spiritual offspring of RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: darkish sky blue.
Attributes: banner with jewel, and white lotus.

**Dhumravati**

Terrible goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Attributes: skull in the hand and
garland of skulls, sword and tusks.

**Dhyanibuddha**

General name of a spiritual or meditation *buddha.*

Buddhist (Vajrayana). An emanation of the **Dhupa** *(incense)*

ADIBUDDHA and generally regarded as one of a Mother goddess.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One group of five representing the cosmic
elements.

of the ASTAMATARA mothers. Color: yellow.

The mystic counterpart of a human *buddha.*

Attribute: a censer.

When the five are represented as a group, their common attribute is a
staff on a lotus.

**Dhupatara** *(incense-Tara)* Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana).
Color: **Dhyanibuddhasakti**

black. Attribute: a censer.

Collective name for a group of goddesses. Buddhist. The five SAKTIS of
the Dhyanibuddhas *.*

Common attributes include a cup and knife.

**Dhurjati**

*(with matted hair)*

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A manifestation of SˇIVA in which his
body is smeared with ash.

**Diana**

Moon goddess. Roman. Living in the forests, she is a huntress and
protector of animals, also **Dhvajagrakeyura**

*(ring on a banner)*

the guardian of virginity. Generally modeled on Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An emanation of the Greek goddess ARTEMIS, she had a
sanctuary AKSOBHYA. She sits on a sun throne. Color: dark on the
Aventine Hill in Rome and, under blue, black or yellow. Attributes:
club, image of Roman rule, took over the Temple of Artemis at Aksobhya,
noose, pestle, prayer wheel, staff, Ephesus.

sword, tiger skin and trident. Three-headed and three-eyed.

**DIANCECHT**

**ORIGIN** Celtic (Irish). Physician god.

**Dhvajosnisa**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times God. Buddhist. An USNISA
deity apparently con-until Christianization circa AD 400.

nected with the guardian deities or *dikpalas* in the **SYNONYMS** none
known.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p93}78 **Diang**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specifically known.

**Digambara** *(naked)*

**ART REFERENCES** monumental carvings and reliefs.

Goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. The SAKTI **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions; Cycles of Kings.*

of Yogambara. Attribute: a bowl.

**NOTE:** Digambara is also an epithet of the A god of whom limited
description is given but goddess KALI in Hindu religion.

who was clearly one of the more important members of the TUATHA DE
DANANN band of Celtic deities in Ireland. Said to be the grandfather of
**Dike**

LUG. He possesses the skills to make every warrior Goddess of justice.
Greek. The daughter of ZEUS.

whole again and is referred to as having made a sil-Depicted as a maiden
whom men violently abuse in ver arm for the god NUADU who was injured in
the the streets but who is honored by the gods and who legendary Battle
of Moytura and who subsequently reports to her father on the misdeeds of
mankind, took the epithet Nuadu *argatlam* (Nuada of the causing divine
retribution. She is depicted on the silver arm). Mortally wounded Tuatha
were bathed Kypselos chest as an attractive woman strangling an and
revived in Diancecht's sacred well, Slane.

ugly goddess of injustice, ADIKIA.

**Diang**

**Dikkumara**

Cow goddess. Shilluk \[Sudan\]. Living along the God. Jain \[India\].
One of the groups under the west bank of the Nile, the Shilluk perceive
Diang general title of BHAVANAVASI (dwelling in places).

as the consort of the first human, Omara, sent by They have youthful
appearance and are associated the creator god. Her son is Okwa, who
married with rain and thunder.

the crocodile goddess NYAKAYA. Thus the three main elements of Shilluk
life are contained in their religious beginnings---men (sky), cows
**Diksa** *(initiation)*

(earth) and crocodiles (water).

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The consort of Ugra and mother of
SANTANA. Also the name of the Buddhist Tantric initiation ceremony.

**Dictynna**

Mother goddess. Cretan. She became syncretized with the Greek goddess
RHEA.

**DIONYSOS**

**ORIGIN** Greek. God of wine and intoxication.

**Didi Thakrun**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from circa 1500 BC

Plague goddess. Hindu \[northern India\]. Associ-and probably earlier
through to Christianiza-ated with cholera. Worshiped locally at Bardvan.

tion circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** Deunysos; Zonnysos; LIBER, BACCHUS

(Roman).

**Dievs**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Pylos; Ayia Irini (Keos).

Sky god. Pre-Christian Latvian. He is depicted in **ART REFERENCES**
chiefly Attic wine amphorae the guise of a gentleman farmer wearing cap
and circa sixth century BC.

sword and mounted on a horse, or driving a cart.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Hymn to Dionysos* (fragmen-Tradition has it that
he first set free the sun.

tary---Homer); *Catalogues* (Hesiod).

[]{#index_split_001.html#p94}**DISANI** 79

Dionysos is a deity associated with a curious form **Dipa Tara**

*(lamp Tara)*

of mass, intoxicated frenzy encouraged by festi-Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). Color: vals of wine-drinking. He has a retinue of male,
yellow. Attribute: a torch.

phallic satyrs wearing animal masks and joined by female maenads.
Although a gigantic phallus was carried in rituals honoring Dionysos, he
is not **Dipankara**

*(light causer)*

a fertility god and the phallic symbolism is purely Deity.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a minor that of sexual arousal and
carousal. Dionysos is group of *buddhas.* Color: yellow. Attributes:
none the son of SEMELE and there is some argument in particular.

that the cult originated in Phrygia or Lydia linked to that of KYBELE
and traveled via Mycenaean culture with sanctuaries in such places as
Pylos **Dipti**

*(brightness)*

and Keos. Greek women traditionally searched Minor goddess. Hindu
(Puranic). No details for Dionysos and it is possible that the Roman
available.

name Bacchus is of Semitic origin, meaning wail-ing (see Tammuz). Other
authors have suggested that the personality of Dionysos emerged from
**Dirghadevi**

*(long goddess)*

Thrace and extended to Homeric Greece but this Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). Consort of argument is now out of favor. Other than in the the
god NIRRTI.

opening of the Homeric epic material, Dionysos scarcely appears in
literature.

There was a major wine-drinking festival **Dis Pater**

(Ionic-Attic) known as the *Anthesteria*, Greater Chthonic underworld
god. Roman. Modeled on and Lesser *Dionysia* festivals with strongly
phallic the Greek god HADES.

connotations and the sacrifice of goats, an *Agrio-nia* festival
(Dorian-Aeolic) and most recently the Athenian celebration of
*Katagogia* which marked **Disa**

*(the ten directions of space)* the legend of Dionysos emerging from the
sea Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Consort of and during which a
ship was carried or drawn on SˇIVA in his terrible aspect of BHIMA and
mother of wheels.

the minor god Sarga (creation).

**Dioskouroi**

**DISANI**

Twin gods. Greek.

`</i>`{=html}

***ORIGIN** Kafir \[Afghanistan---southern Hin-See also* POLYDEUKES.

dukush\]. Supreme fertility and mother goddess.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** origins uncertain **Dipa**

*(personification of the oil-lamp)* and still persisting in parts today.

Goddess of light. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

**SYNONYMS** Disni (Prasun region); Dizeile.

Considered to be among the group of **CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout the
Kafir ASTAMATARAS (mothers). Color: blue or red.

region, particularly at the village of Shtiwe Attribute: a lamp.

(Prasun).

[]{#index_split_001.html#p95}80 **Disciplina** **ART REFERENCES** large
wooden sculptures.

Disani is the protectress of the bonds of kin-LITERARY SOURCES Robertson
G.S. *The Kafirs of* ship and family loyalty. In conflict with this role
*the Hindukush* ( *1896*) *;* Morgenstierne G. *Some* she also
inadvertently slaughtered her own son *Kati Myths and Hymns* ( *1951*)
*.*

by decapitation, which gave rise to an annual spring rite of the dying
god, witnessed in the reli-Disani is the most important goddess of the
gions of many other agricultural and pastoral Hindukush, particularly
revered by the Prasun societies.

people. Legend has it that she emerged from the right breast of the
creator god IMRA.

Alternatively she emerged from a sacred lake **Disciplina**

into which a sun disc had fallen, as a golden Minor goddess. Roman.
Significant in the tree. Other legends place her as the daughter of
legions, known particularly from the second the god SUDREM, or of INDR
and the goddess century BC.

Nangi-Wutr. She is the consort of Imra and other major deities in the
pantheon and therefore bears strong fertility and maternal **Discordia**

connotations. She has a son, B

Minor goddess of dissent. Roman. Modeled on AGISHT, conceived when she
was raped by a demon. She also the Greek deity ERIS.

plays the role of huntress. Her home is said to be Sudrem.

**Disir**

Disani is also a benign and comforting god-Collective name for guardian
goddesses.

dess of death who carries the deceased into the Nordic (Icelandic) and
Germanic. They were the House of the Great Mother. She is perceived in
subject of a sacrificial ritual in autumn and have human form, armed
with a bow and quiver, with strong fertility connotations as vegetation
and streams of milk pouring from her breasts. She fertility deities.
They are identified in the *Sigr-can appear as a wild goat from whose
footprints *drifumal* (Poetic Edda) and include the Valkyries spring the
shoots of wheat, and symbolically as and Norns of Germanic mythology.*

a tree (see INANA) whose roots embody the underworld Nirmali. Her cult
centers seem to have been connected with the villages of Shtiwe,
**Diti**

Bagramatal and Kamdesh.

Goddess. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). The As goddess of death,
Disani receives the prayers daughter of DAKSA, a consort of ADITI (in of
women whose menfolk are about to go into the *Rg Veda*) or KASYAPA and
the mother of a combat. Legend has it that she lives in a golden race of
demons. Attributes: blue lotus, child and fortress with seven doors and
seven roads radiat-fruit.

ing from it. As a fertility goddess she is a guardian *See also* Aditi.

of cattle. In her role as vegetation deity, she tills the land. She also
sows, threshes and winnows grain.

**Divona**

Sacrifice is in the form of a goat, or more usu-Fertility goddess.
Celtic (Gallic). Associated with ally milk, butter and cheese.

water and known only from inscriptions.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p96}**Duillae** 81

**Djila'qons**

**Dongo**

Sea goddess. Haida Indian \[Queen Charlotte Storm god. Songhai \[Niger
valley, West Africa\].

Island, Canada\]. An old woman who lives at the The creator of
thunderbolts, which are perceived head of a major inlet in Haida
territory and conas stone ax-heads. As the celestial smith he forges
trols all the creatures of the sea.

lightning and strikes a huge bell with his ax to generate thunder.

**Dogumrik**

Local guardian and warrior god. Kafir **Donn**

\[Afghanistan\]. Known from the village of Chthonic underworld god.
Celtic (Irish). Accord-Shtiwe in the southeastern Hindukush, Dogum-ing
to legend, he lives on an island to the south-rik is the herdsman to the
daughters of the god west of Munster and is responsible for the passage
IMRA and possibly a localized equivalent of the of the dead toward the
otherworld.

god MON.

**Doris**

**Dolichenus**

Sea goddess. Greek. Daughter of OKEANOS and T

Weather god. Western Semitic (Syrian).

ETHYS and consort of NEREUS. In Hesiod's Depicted bearded and standing
upon a bull.

*Theogony* her children include AMPHITRITE and T

Attributes include a double ax and lightning. He HETIS among many minor
figures.

became syncretized with the Roman god JUPITER.

**Doudoun**

God of Nile cataracts. Nubian. Depicted as an antelope with twisted
horns. His consorts are Sati **Dombi**

and Anuket. Modeled on the Egyptian ram god Goddess of terrifying
appearance. Buddhist. One KHNUM. Also Dodonu.

of a group of *GAURI.* Color: red or blue. Attribute: *See also* ANUKIS.

a banner.

**Dsahadoldza** *(fringe mouth)* **Don**

Chthonic god of earth and water. Navaho \[USA\].

Mother goddess. Celtic (Welsh). Described in the A number of deities are
known under this title.

*Mabinogion* as the progenitress of the Welsh panThe priest
impersonating the god has one side of theon. Equates with the Irish
goddess DANU.

his body painted red and the other side black. He wears a buckskin mask
painted with a horizontal yellow band to represent the evening sky and
**Donar**

eight vertical black stripes to represent rain.

Storm god. Germanic. The god of thunder whose symbol is either a hammer
or an ax. The day name Donnerstag in modern German equates **Duillae**

with Thursday, a corruption of Thor's day.

`</i>`{=html}

*Fertility and vegetation goddesses. Romano-See also* THOR.

Iberian. Comparable with the *MATRES* in Gaul.

[]{#index_split_001.html#p97}82 **Dulha Deo** **Dulha Deo**

are modeled. In Syriac tradition he is the son of Minor god of the
bridegroom. Hindu. Attribute: the mortal father Kautar (Aramaic:
Kosˇar).

an ax hanging from a tree.

*See also* KOTAR.

**DUMUZI**

**Dur**

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylon-Chthonic underworld god.
Kassite \[Iran\]. Equates ian-Akkadian) \[Iraq\]. Shepherd and
vegetation with the Babylonian-Akkadian god NERGAL.

god; underworld god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC or earlier to circa 200 BC.

**Durangama** *(going far away)* **SYNONYMS** Damn; Ama-usum-gal-ana;
Tammuz Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of sev-

(Hebrew).

eral deified BHUMIS recognized as different spir-CENTER(S) OF CULT none.

itual spheres through which a disciple passes.

[]{#index_split_002.html}

**ART REFERENCES** plaques; votive stelae; glyptics, Color: green.
Attributes: staff on a great lotus.

etc.

**LITERARY SOURCES** cuneiform texts including the *Inana's Descent and
the Death of Dumuzi.*

**DURGA**

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Puranic) \[India\]. Vengeful war-Dumuzi, as popularly
understood, is a male rior goddess.

deity who in mythical times was the tutelary **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa AD 400 (but god of the city of Bad-tibira between Lagasˇand
probably known from earlier times) until present.

Uruk in southern Mesopotamia. It is believed **SYNONYMS** KUMARI;
Shakti; Agni-Durga (eight-that there was also a goddess Dumuzi from
Kin-armed); APARAJITA (unconquered).

unir near Lagasˇ. The two became syncretized as **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none.

the single male personality who occupies a spe-ART REFERENCES sculptures
generally bronze but cial place in the Sumerian pantheon as the con-also
stone. Reliefs.

sort of the goddess INANA. He is the first "dying **LITERARY SOURCES**
chiefly *Ramayana* and *Mahab-and rising" god to be historically
recorded by *harata* epics and Puranic texts, but mentioned name.*

by name in Vedic literature.

Dumuzi is particularly associated with the date palm. He is commanded by
Inana (who is herself Durga is one of the angry and aggressive aspects
of under a pledge to the goddess ERESˇKIGAL) to the goddess Sakti, whose
earliest role in Hindu enter the underworld for a period of each year,
mythology is to fight and conquer demons but who which accounts for the
seasonal demise of the also personifies the SAKTI or female aspect of
any green world to drought.

male deity. Iconographically, Durga is depicted as His worshipers were
chiefly women but his a beautiful golden-skinned woman who rides upon
cult was very widespread and as late as Biblical a lion or a tiger. She
has eight or ten arms, each times there are references to women "weeping
bearing a weapon presented to her by different for Tammuz." It may be
argued that Dumuzi is gods and including the conch shell of VISŇU, the
the model on which later gods including ADONIS

trident of SˇIVA, the bow of RAMA and the *sudarshan*

[]{#index_split_002.html#p98}**DYAUS PITAR** 83

(spoked disc) of KRSNA. These gifts extend to her Miletus and he was
equated with DIONYSOS.

the power of the eight or ten gods. She may wear Also Dusˇares;
Dus-Sˇara.

a necklace of skulls. She is associated with the Himalaya and Vindhya
mountains and is often depicted slaughtering the buffalo-demon MAHISA
**Duzhi**

by thrusting her trident into his body.

Local god of uncertain affinities. Kafir \[Afghan-In a contrasting
aspect in later Hindu istan\]. Known only from an altar stone which
traditions, Durga takes the role of a mother was generally erected
beside that of the water goddess and consort of Sˇiva and becomes partly
god BAGISHT. Sacrifice was in the form of a male syncretized with
PARVATI. She is also linked with goat.

the fertility of crops. In this capacity her most important festival is
the *Durga Puja*, celebrated at harvest time, during which devotees
**Dvipakumara**

persistently make obscene gestures and com-God. Jain \[India\]. One of
the groups under the ments to stimulate her fecundity. She is general
title of BHAVANAVASI (dwelling in places).

depicted flanked by four other deities, LAKSMI, They are of youthful
appearance and associated SARASVATI, GANESA and KARTTIKEYA, who are with
rain and thunder.

said to be her children.

In general Durga is perceived in northern India as the gentle bride
epitomizing family unity, while **DYAUS PITAR**

*(heaven father)*

in southern India she is revered more in her war-ORIGIN Hindu (Vedic)
\[India\]. Creator god.

like and murderous aspect.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1500 BC or earlier until present.

**SYNONYMS** the Sanskrit *dyaus* is derived from **Durjaya**
*(unconquerable)* the Indo-European root which also gives Minor goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-Deus (Roman); ZEUS (Greek); TYR (German),
dant of the god BUDDHAKAPALA.

etc.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specific.

**ART REFERENCES** none.

**Dusˇara** *('the one' of sˇara)* **LITERARY SOURCES** *Rg-veda* and
other Vedic Local

tutelary

god.

Western

Semitic

texts.

(Nabataean). Associated with vegetation and fertility in the Hauran
region from about 312 BC

Dyaus pitar is a creator god associated with until circa AD 500.
Regarded as a supreme deity, the goddess Prthivi; the primordial couple
are comparable to BAAL SˇAMIN, who never achieved normally addressed as
Dyavaprthivi. Between Dusˇara's popularity among the nomadic them they
created the rest of the Vedic pantheon, Nabataeans, for whom farming was
precarious.

placed heaven and earth in conjunction with one He was represented by a
black obelisk at Petra.

another and generally preserved the cosmic order.

Sacred animals are the eagle and panther. Attrib-Dyaus is overshadowed
and superseded by the utes include a vine stem. In Hellenic times he
rain god INDRA in later Hindu tradition, possibly was the subject of
inscriptions at Delos and because he was brought into India by the Aryan

[]{#index_split_002.html#p99}84 **Dzivaguru** settlers from the north
who had been used to a said to have ruled both heaven and earth and
cold, bleak climate and who needed a supreme lived in a palace by a
sacred lake near Dande.

deity more relevant to a hot, dry environment.

She is depicted wearing goatskins and bearing a cornucopia holding
magical substances.

Her sacred creatures are mythical golden **Dzivaguru**

sunbirds, probably modeled on swallows, a Chthonic mother goddess.
Korekore (Shona) pair of which were actually discovered in

\[northern Zimbabwe, southern Africa\]. Originally Zimbabwe.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p100}E

6

**E Alom**

*(conceiver of children)*

One of the major deities in the old Babylonian-Primeval creator goddess.
Mayan (Quiche, classi-Akkadian pantheon who evolved from the model cal
Mesoamerican) \[Guatemalan highlands\]. The of Enki. God of sweet water
and of wisdom. His consort of E QUAHOLOM, identified in the consort is
DAMKINA and his temple is the Apsu sacred Maya book, the *Popol Vuh.*
Her son is house or *E-engurra* in Eridu (lost). By the neo-GUKUMATZ,
the counterpart of the Aztec god Babylonian period his popularity as a
major deity QUETZALCOATL. Also Bitol.

had waned and he was relegated to the role of father of the god MARDUK.

**E Quaholom**

*(begetter of children)*

Primeval creator god. Mayan (Quiche, classical **Eacus**

Mesoamerican) \[Guatemala highlands\]. Identi-Weather god.
Romano-Iberian. Known from the fied in the sacred Maya book the *Popol
Vuh.* The area of Castille and syncretized with the local consort of the
goddess E ALOM and the father of Roman deity Jupiter Solutorius.

GUKUMATZ who equates with the Aztec QUETZALCOATL. Also Tzacol.

**Ebisu**

God of luck. Shinto \[Japan\]. The most popular **EA**

of seven gods of fortune recognized in Shinto-ORIGIN Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian) ism and frequently linked with the god

\[Iraq\]. God of primordial waters.

DAIKOKU. He is depicted as a fat, smiling and **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1900 BC to bearded fisherman holding a fishing rod in
one circa 200 BC.

hand and a sea bream in the other. The name **SYNONYMS** Ea-sˇarru; ENKI
(Sumerian).

does not appear in the classical sacred texts **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Eridu, Babylon.

*Nihongi* and *Kojiki,* but Ebisu is known to **ART REFERENCES**
glyptics and other carvings.

have been worshiped in ancient times among **LITERARY SOURCES**
cuneiform texts including fishermen. From about the sixteenth century
*Enuma Elisˇ, Epic Of Gilgamesˇ, Nergal and* his character changed and
he became a deity *Eresˇkigal* etc.

associated with profit. Thus he is a patron of 85

[]{#index_split_002.html#p101}86 **Edeke**

commerce and his picture hangs in most estab-Ehecatl

lishments. He is perhaps syncretized with the Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) gods HIRUKO and KOTO-SHIRO-NUSHI. He may

\[Mexico\]. The sun deity representing the second also be identified
with Fudo, the god of knowl-of the five world ages, each of which lasted
for edge. He does not join the rest of the Shinto 2028 heavenly years,
each heavenly year being pantheon in the great October festival at Izumo
fifty-two terrestrial years. Assigned to the air or because he is deaf.
His festival is celebrated con-wind and presided over by QUETZALCOATL,
to currently in his own temple.

whose complex of deities he belongs. According to tradition, the age
ended in a cataclysmic destruction caused by hurricanes. All humanity
**Edeke**

turned into monkeys. Illustrated by the "Stone of God of disasters. Teso
\[Uganda, East Africa\]. The the Four Suns" \[Yale Peabody Museum\].
Also (4) antagonist of the creator god APAP, Edeke is pro-Ehecatl;
Ehecatonatiuh.

pitiated during times of famine and plague.

**Ehecatl-Quetzalcoatl**

**Edusa**

Primordial god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Minor god of infants.
Roman. Responsible for

\[Mexico\]. A syncretization of EHECATL and the proper nourishment of
the child.

QUETZALCOATL, one of four gods who support the lowest heaven at each
cardinal point. He is perceived as residing in the west (codices
*Borgia* **Eee-A-O** *(Yao)*

and *Vaticanus B*). He is the deity who rules Primordial being. Gnostic
Christian. The first of over the ninth of the thirteen heavens, Itztapal
the androgynous principles born to YALDABAOTH, Nanatzcayan (where the
stone slabs crash the prime parent, ruling the seven heavens of
together). In a separate tradition, Ehecatl-chaos in gnostic mythology.

Quetzalcoatl executed the monstrous god XOLOTL when he declined to offer
his blood in self-sacrifice for the creation of mankind.

**Egeria**

Fertility goddess. Roman. Deity of oak trees whose priestess enacted an
annual sacred mar-EILEITHYIA

*(the coming)*

riage with the king of Rome, who took the part of **ORIGIN** Greek and
previously Mycenaean. God-JUPITER. The festival is a variation of that
cele-dess of birth.

brating the marriage of ZEUS and HERA which **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 1500 BC until took place in Athens. A number of springs and
Christianization (circa AD 400).

lakes were sacred to her.

**SYNONYMS** Eleuthyia (possibly original Minoan); Ilithyia (Roman).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** chiefly in Crete where there **Egres**

exists an early (Mycenaean) cave sanctuary at Fertility god. Karelian
\[Finland\]. The deity Amnisos, and in the region of Lakonia.

responsible for the turnip crop. Also Akras.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and reliefs.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p102}**EL** 87

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Theogony* and *Hymn to Apollo* carrying strap in
his headdress and sometimes a (Hesiod).

pack on his back. Also God M.

Primarily worshiped by women, Eileithyia is **Ekadasarudra**

called upon specifically to ease the pain and dan-Collective name for a
group of gods. Hindu. The ger of childbirth. It was said that the cries
of labor eleven forms of the god R

summoned her presence. The daughter of Z

UDRA, each typically

EUS

represented with sixteen arms. Common attrib-and HERA and the sibling of
HEBE and ARES, she utes include ax, moon disc and tiger skin.

assisted at the birth of APOLLO. Her role is later largely superseded by
ARTEMIS. The name is also used in a plural collective sense (reflecting
the **Ekajata**

*(she who has but one chignon)* practice of women in a neighborhood
coming Goddess of good fortune. Buddhist (Varjayana).

together to assist at childbirth). In Sparta there She offers happiness
and removes personal obsta-was allegedly a running track at the end of
which cles. Occasionally found attending the goddess was a temple to
Eileithyia.

Khadirayani-Tara. She is an emanation of AKSOBHYA and a form of TARA.
She may have one or twelve heads. Color: blue. Attributes: arrow, ax,
**Eirene**

bell, blue lotus, book, bow, conch, cup, hook, Goddess of peace. Greek.
The daughter of ZEUS

image of AMITABHA on the crown, knife, noose, and THEMIS and the sister
of Horae, DIKE and skull, staff, sword and tiger skin. Three-eyed.

EUNOMIA.

*See also* HOURS.

**Ekanetra**

*(on e-eyed)*

Minor deity. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of **Eji Ogbe**

a group of emancipated VIDYESVARAS (lords of Tutelary god. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\].

knowledge) considered to be aspects of SˇIVA.

The so-called "king" of the pantheon and men-Virtually identical with
EKARUDRA, but with a tioned in a legend of the dove which is a symbol
single eye.

of prosperity.

**Ekarudra**

**Ek Chuah**

Minor deity. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of God of merchants. Mayan
(classical Mesoameri-a group of emancipated VIDYESVARAS (lords of can)
\[Mexico\]. Also the deity responsible for the knowledge) considered to
be aspects of SˇIVA.

cacao crop. (The cacao bean was traditionally the Virtually identical
with EKANETRA, but with standard currency throughout Mesoamerica.)
normal eyes.

Probably of Putun origin, he is typically depicted painted black, except
for a red area around the lips and chin. He has a distinctive downwardly
pro-EL

jecting lower lip, horseshoe shapes around each **ORIGIN** Western
Semitic regions and Israel eye and a highly elongated nose. He may also
(northern Hebrew tribes) \[Syria, Lebanon and bear a scorpion's tail.
Other attributes include a Israel\]. Creator god.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p103}88 **Elagabal** **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 2500 BC to **Elagabal** *(lord of the mountain)* 700 BC.

Local tutelary god. Syrian. Probably originat-SYNONYMS *et elyon* (most
high god); *et sadday* (god ing as a mountain deity with strong solar
links.

of the mountain); *et olam* (everlasting god); *et* His sacred animal is
the eagle. His cult was based *betel* (god of storms), IL \[southern
Arabian\].

on the town of Emesa \[Homs\], where he was **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Tirzah, Sˇamaria, Bethel, worshiped in the form of a dome-shaped, black
Dan and many local hill shrines.

stone obelisk. His name became Hellenized as **ART REFERENCES** none
extant other than from Heliogabalos.

later artists.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Vetus Testamentum;* Qum'

Ran texts.

**El'eb**

Primordial god. Western Semitic (Canaanite).

Modeled on the creator god of the Canaanites, In some texts the god EL
(IL) is not the original Il, represented by the bull and revered by the
being but is preceded by a father figure.

Hebrew tribes who settled northern Palestine.

EL-EB translates as "god the father."

According to some Ugaritic (Ras Sˇamra) texts, *See also* YALDABAOTH.

not the original creator but the offspring of an older principal, EL-EB
(god of the father). In Biblical texts the word *el* comes to be used in
a **Elim**

descriptive sense as a qualifying epithet meaning Collective term for
gods. Judaic. Found in the

"lord." Possibly El came to represent the sum of *Vetus Testamentum* and
distinguishing the lower all the creator spirits of the northern tribes.

order of gods from the great deities, *ELOHIM.*

Israel was unwilling to part with the name against pressure from the
southern state of Judah (see YHWH), but the name fell into disuse after
**Elkunirsa**

suppression of Israel by Tiglathpileser II Creator god. Western Semitic
(Canaanite) and (Assyria). The Hebrew term *ELOHIM* may denote Hittite.
Allegedly borrowed and modified from an "upper tier" of great gods while
*ELIM* applies the Canaanite god IL. His consort is Asěrdus to a lower
order of deities.

(Canaanite: ASĚRTU).

**NOTE:** Biblical traditions were carried by the southern state of
Judah. The impression is given that El is a distant, vaguely defined
figure per-Ellaman

*(lady of the boundary)*

ceived in human form---"he" is able to see, hear, Goddess of passage.
Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil) walk and touch---though no images in human

\[southern India\]. A goddess guarding boundaries form seem to have been
created. El was appar-of villages and fields. One of the NAVASAKTI or
ently symbolized in Israel from circa 922 BC

astral deities. Also Ellaiyamman.

again by the bull calf (I Kings 12), probably emulating the Canaanite
precedent. The voice of El is said to be like thunder, the clouds are
his **Ellel**

chariot and he waters the mountains from Creator god. Hittite and
Hurrian. Derived from heaven.

the Babylonian-Akkadian god ELLIL.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p104}**ENKI** 89

**Ellil**

placed in charge of the sacred rivers Tigris and Creator god.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Euphrates by the god ENKI. He is also god of
Akkadian).

canals, irrigation and farming. In Babylonian *See also* ENLIL.

times he becomes the son of EA and is syncretized with ADAD.

**Eloai**

Primordial being. Gnostic Christian. The second **Endouellicus**

of the androgynous principles born to YALD-Chthonic oracular and healing
god. Romano-ABAOTH, the prime parent, ruling the seven heav-Iberian.
Known from the Portuguese region.

ens of chaos in Gnostic mythology.

Probably the recipient of pig sacrifice.

**Elohim**

Collective term for gods. Judaic. Found in the **Endursaga**

*(lofty mace)*

*Vetus Testamentum* and distinguishing the higher Herald god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian). He leads order of great gods from the minor
deities, the Sumerian pantheon particularly in times of *ELIM.*

Also applied to the Israelite god Y

conflict. Also ISˇUM (Akkadian).

HWH.

**Emeli Hin**

**ENKI**

*(lord of the soul)*

Creator god. Tuareg \[central Sudan\]. A generic **ORIGIN** Mesopotamian
(Sumerian) \[Iraq\]. Cre-title meaning "my lord."

ator god; god of wisdom; god of sweet water.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC to circa 1750 BC.

**Eme'mqut**

**SYNONYMS** EA (god of the deep, Akkadian); Animistic spirit. Siberian
Koryak. See Lugal-id(ak) (owner of the river); Lugal-QUIKINN.A'QU.

abzu(ak) (owner of the deeps); NUDIMMUD

(image fashioner).

**Emesˇ**

*Center*( *s*) *of worship* probably at Eridu (Abu Vegetation god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

Sˇahrain), but known only from literature.

Emesˇwas created at the wish of E

**ART REFERENCES** plaques, votive stelae, glyptics.

NLIL to take

responsibility on earth for woods, fields, sheep **LITERARY SOURCES**
creation epics including *Atra-folds and stables. He is identified with
the abun-hasis, Enki and the World Order,* temple hymns etc.

dance of the earth and with summer. An unidentified deity who is
depicted iconographically with As god of water in its capacity to
nourish the earth, a plough may well be Emesˇ.

Enki is one of the major Sumerian deities. The son of AN and NAMMU, he
is considered by some to be a late entry to the pantheon. His consort is
DAMK-Enbilulu

INA and his sanctuary at Eridu is *E-engurra*. He is River god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Baby-usually represented as a figure in
typical horned lonian-Akkadian). In creation mythology he is headdress
and tiered skirt with two streams of water

[]{#index_split_002.html#p105}90 **Enkimdu**

(Tigris and Euphrates) springing from his shoulders **SYNONYMS** ELLIL;
Illil; Ilu; Nunamnir.

or from a vase and including leaping fish. He may **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Nippur, Dur Kurigalzu, but also hold the eagle-like Imdugud (thunder)
bird, also at Eridu and Ur.

thus signifying clouds rising from the waters. His **ART REFERENCES**
plaques, votive stelae and glyp-foot may rest on an ibex. Among his
offspring are tics.

ASˇALLUHA, NIN-SAR (by NINHURSAG˜A), NIN-IMMA **LITERARY SOURCES**
creation texts, particularly (by NINKURRA) and UTTU (by NINMAH).

the *Lament of Ur* and *Creation of the Hoe;* tem-Enki is a complex and,
at times, Machiavellian ple hymns including the *Hymn to Enlil,* etc.

character. The running of day-to-day affairs is left to him and in the
creation mythology he Enlil is the son of the primordial AN and KI. The
organized the earth and established law and order.

tutelary deity of Nippur where, in his honor, the He is also seen in a
heroic light, having been one *Ekur* sanctuary was built (not
re-discovered), he of three principal deities engaged in the primor-was
the most important god of southern dial battle between good and evil,
the latter per-Mesopotamia during the third millennium BC.

sonified in the dragon Kur. In the Sumerian His consort is NINLIL who
was impregnated by creation epic Enki set out in a boat to avenge the
the "waters of Enlil" to create the moon god abduction by Kur of the
goddess ERESˇKIGAL. Kur NANNA. (In the Akkadian pantheon his consort
fought back with huge stones.

becomes MULLILTU.) He is depicted in horned Enki is perceived to fill
the Tigris and Euphrates headdress and tiered skirt, or by a horned
crown with sacred sweet water. He also appoints various on a pedestal.
According to the "Hymn to Enlil"

other minor deities to their duties in connection he works alone and
unaided. He is said to have with the well-being of the natural world.
Addi-made the pick-ax, "caused the good day to come tionally he is god
of artists and craftsmen.

forth" and "brought forth seed from the earth."

According to one legend, Enki generated the He was invoked to bless his
cities and ensure plants from his semen and inside his body until it
prosperity and abundance. His importance was made him ill, whereupon
Ninhursag˜a placed him such that the tutelary gods of other cities
"trav-in her own vagina and gave birth to his progeny.

eled" to Nippur with offerings to Enlil. Enlil cre-INANA, Ninhursag˜a
and ENLIL are variously ated several deities concerned with overseeing
drawn, at times, as serious adversaries.

the natural world. In his more destructive aspect he allowed the birth
goddess to kill at birth and was responsible for miscarriage in cows and
ewes.

**Enkimdu**

He was seen as manifesting himself in both God of canals and ditches.
Mesopotamian benevolence and destructive violence. Because of
(Sumerian). In creation mythology he is given his his peculiarly
national status he became down-task by the god ENKI.

`</i>`{=html}

*graded in the Babylonian and Assyrian pan-See also* ENBILULU.

theons, being superseded respectively by MARDUK and ASSUR.

**ENLIL**

*(lord wind?)*

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian) \[Iraq\]. God **Enmesarra**

of the air.

Chthonic god of the law. Mesopotamian (Sumer-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 3500 BC or ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). According to texts
earlier to circa 1750 BC.

he controls the me's or divine rules.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p106}**EPONA** 91

**Ennead**

HYPERION and THEA, and the sister of HELIOS

The Heliopolis pantheon. Egyptian (Lower). The (sun) and SELENE (moon).
The consort of AEO-nine major deities enumerated and given their LOS,
the storm god son of POSEIDON, she bore six genealogy by the priesthood
of Heliopolis, the children who represent the various winds. Hesiod
center of the sun-worshiping cult in Lower Egypt.

accounts her as the consort of Astraeos. In sepa-Comprising the sun god
ATUM (or Atum-Re) and rate tradition she is the mother of Memnon who his
offspring, SˇU, TEFNUT, GEB, NUT, OSIRIS, ISIS, was slain at Troy, and
her tears are the morning SETH and NEPHTHYS. Other Egyptian cult centers
dew.

possessed similar pantheons though not necessar-See also AURORA.

ily including the same list of deities. Thus, for example, the god PTAH
presided at Thebes.

**Eostre**

Fertility goddess of spring. Anglo-Saxon. The **Ennugi**

derivation of "Easter." Probably a number of the God. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Babylonian-obscure folk customs surrounding Easter and
still Akkadian). The attendant and throne-bearer of practiced in England
trace back to her worship.

ENLIL (ELLIL).

**Epimetheus**

**Enten**

Minor creator god. Greek and Roman. One Fertility god. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian). Created of the four sons of IAPETOS and Klymene by ENLIL as
a guardian deity of farmers alongside (Titan), and the brother of
PROMETHEUS.

the minor god EMESˇ, Enten was given specific Jointly responsible for
the creation of mankind.

responsibility for the fertility of ewes, goats, cows, Epimetheus'
strongest claim to fame lies in his donkeys, birds and other animals. He
is identified liaison with the first mortal woman, Pandora, with the
abundance of the earth and with the win-whom the gods had cautioned him
to avoid.

ter period.

Her curiosity caused her to open the box belonging to JUPITER in which
he had placed all **Enundu**

the vices, diseases and sufferings of humanity, but which also included
the benevolent spirit Plague god. Gishu \[Uganda, East Africa\]. A god
of hope.

identified with smallpox and propitiated with the sacrifice of a goat.

**EPONA** *(mare)*

**Enzu**

**ORIGIN** Celtic (Gallic). Horse goddess with fer-God. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian). The tility connotations.

name is a corruption, apparently a misreading of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 400 BC and Suen, the archaic form of SIN.

probably earlier until Christianization (circa AD 400).

**SYNONYMS** none.

**Eos**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** probably originating from Sky goddess. Hellenized
Indo-European. The Alesia in Gaul but spreading extensively, spirit of
the dawn. She is the daughter of including Rome.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p107}92 **Erebos**

**ART REFERENCES** stone and bronze statuettes with his mother to create
the first elements of the (mainly Luxembourg and Côte d'Or); various
cosmos, AETHER (light) and Hemera (day), in pre-monumental carvings.

Homeric mythology.

**LITERARY SOURCES** inscriptions.

A popular equestrian goddess closely allied with **ERESˇKIGAL** *(the
great below)* the Celtic trade in, and domestic use of, horses.

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylon-Concerned with healing and
with the fertility of ian-Akkadian) \[Iraq\]. Chthonic underworld
domestic animals. The cult probably originated goddess.

from Alesia in the heartland of Gallic resistance **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC or and location of Vercingetorix's final stand
against earlier to 200 BC or later.

Julius Caesar. She is arguably the only Celtic god-SYNONYMS ALLATU(M).

dess to have been worshiped in Rome itself and **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none.

her popularity was spread throughout the regions **ART REFERENCES**
plaques, votive stelae, glyptics, of Roman occupation (see also
MORRIGAN). Her etc.

festival was celebrated on December 18.

**LITERARY SOURCES** creation epics and other texts Epona is typically
depicted with mares and including *Inana's Descent and the Death of*
foals, usually riding side-saddle or merely in asso-Dumuzi.

ciation with horses. She also holds cornucopiae, sheaves of corn and
other fruits suggesting an Eresˇkigal is the consort of NERGAL and queen
of ancillary role as a vegetation goddess. Epona is the underworld. She
is also the mother of also, on occasion, linked with dogs and birds.

NINAZU. According to some texts she was once Votive inscriptions have
been found at Allerey, a sky goddess who was abducted by the
mon-Armançon and Essay (Côte d'Or), Jabreilles, strous deity Kur. She
lives in the palace of Luxeuil, Santanay and others where sometimes she
Ganzir and equates with the Greek PERSE-is alone with horse(s) and
sometimes is depicted PHONE. Arguably, Eresˇkigal may be seen as a with
the "mothers" (see MATRES). She was partic-dark alter ego of the goddess
INANA and is iden-ularly worshiped by Roman cavalry regiments. At tified
in some texts as her elder sibling. Her con-Armançon she rides in a cart
reminiscent of the sort is also identified as GUGULANA. In legend

"tour" of other northern fertility goddesses (see Eresˇkigal is
challenged by Inana but after judg-NERTHUS). In other circumstances
Epona figurines ment by the seven Annunaki, the underworld are found
associated with burial grounds such as La goddess renders her a corpse
for three days until Horgue au Sablon illustrating the common link, she
is revived through the intervention of ENKI, well attested in ancient
and modern cults, between the god of wisdom. In western Semitic
pan-fertility and death. Epona may also be enshrined theons Eresˇkigal
becomes Allatu.

close to thermal springs under which circumstance she often appears
naked like a water nymph e.g.

Allerey and Saulon-la-Chapelle.

**Erh Lang** *(master)*

Tutelary deity. Chinese. Associated with a celestial dog, Erh Lang was
once honored with a **Erebos**

sanctuary in Beijing (Peking). According to tra-Primordial deity.
Greco-Roman. Engendered by dition he and the dog saved the city from
flood-CHAOS and NYX, he formed an incestuous liaison ing. His attributes
include a bow which he is

[]{#index_split_002.html#p108}**Eshu** 93

depicted drawing, and arrows. The dog may be **Erkilek**

replaced by a rat, in which case the arrows are Hunting god. Inuit
\[North America\]. A malev-not included. The rat is a sign of impending
olent deity with the head and nose of a dog and wealth and therefore the
drawing of an empty the body of a man. He carries a bow, with bow at the
rat is a sign which invokes wealth of arrows contained in a quiver, and
is an expert children.

archer.

**Erinys**

**Eros**

Chthonic goddess of wrath. Greek. According to Primordial deity.
Greco-Roman. One of the chil-legend she was a consort of POSEIDON by
whom dren of AETHER and Hemera in the pre-Homeric she bore the fabulous
horse Areon. By implication cosmos. Listed in Hesiod's *Theogony* as one
of she may also have been a grim maternal figure three archetypal beings
with CHAOS and GAIA.

who engendered all horses. She may be equated Also AMOR (Roman).

with a wrathful DEMETER who is sometimes given the epithet Erinys.
Erinys appears in the collective form of three Erinyes, their heads
covered **Erra**

with snake-locks and bearing torches from the God of war. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akka-underworld. In the *Iliad* they are described as dian).
Known chiefly from the *Erra Epic*, circa those "who beneath the earth
punish dead men, 1000 BC, he is also the god of raids, riots and whoever
has sworn a false oath." In Roman scorched earth. Closely identified
with the god mythology they are the Furies.

NERGAL, his cult center is Emeslam in the city of Kutha (lost). In
Babylonian times he is identified as a plague god.

**Eris**

Goddess of dissent or strife. Greek. The consort of ARES, the god of
war, and the mother of **Erua**

See ZARPANITU(M).

HORKOS (oath). She is depicted throwing the apple of discord among
guests at a wedding, offering it "to the fairest" to provoke argument.

**Es**

In Roman mythology she becomes DISCORDIA.

Creator god. Ket \[Siberian\]. Described as an old man with a long black
beard, he fashioned the first humans from clay. Those tossed from his
**Eriu**

right hand became men, and those from his left Fertility goddess. Celtic
(Irish). An aspect of the became women.

MORRIGAN. One of the deities who were known as the "Sovereignty of
Ireland" and wedded symbolically to a mortal king. Also a warrior
goddess, **Eshu**

capable of changing shape from girl to hag, and Itinerant god. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\].

into birds and animals. She is patroness of the An ancient deity
regarded as the attendant royal seat of Uisnech in County Meath. Eire
and and messenger of the creator god OLODUMARE.

Erin are corruptions of her name.

He passes among mortal people assessing *See also* BADB.

character and meting out punishment. Devotees

[]{#index_split_002.html#p109}94 **Esˇmun**

are identified by necklaces of black or brown of the home of the gods
holding a set of keys. He beads.

is known for his trickery.

**Esˇmun**

**Esus**

God of healing. Western Semitic (Phoenician).

God of war. Celtic (Continental European). Men-Known first from the Iron
Age levels at Sidon, tioned by the Roman writer Lucan but otherwise his
cult spread as far as Carthage, Cyprus virtually unknown. He may have
originated as a and Sardinia. Possibly became syncretized tree god. One
carving \[Trier\] identifies Esus with the god MELQART and, in Hellenic
times, felling a tree with birds in the branches (see with the physician
god ASKLEPIOS. His name also INANA). Elsewhere he is associated with
three further became linked with the mother goddess cranes and a bull.

CAELESTIS.

**Eunomia**

**Estsanatlehi** *(woman that changes)* Goddess of order. Greek. One of
the children of Fertility goddess. Navaho \[USA\]. Probably ZEUS and
THEMIS, her siblings include the regarded as the most powerful deity in
the Horae, DIKE and EIRENE.

Navaho pantheon, she has powers of endless *See also* HOURS.

self-rejuvenation. According to tradition, she was created from a small
turquoise image into which life was infused through a ritual of the
**Euros**

great gods and she is the sister of the goddess God of the east winds.
Greco-Roman. One of the YOLKAI ESTAN. She is also the consort of the
sons of EOS. Particularly known from Sparta and sun god TSOHANOAI and
the mother of the war later Romanized as Eurus.

god NAYENEZGANI. She is said to live in the west and is benevolent in
nature, sending the gentle rains of summer and the warm thawing winds of
**Eurynome**

spring.

Sea goddess. Greek. The daughter of Nisos and mother of the Graces. Also
the mother of Belle-pheron, fathered by POSEIDON, though she is **Esu**

accounted as the consort of GLAUKOS. Little else God of passage. Edo
\[Benin and Nigeria, West is known, but her cult center was apparently
at Africa\]. A fearsome deity who stands at the gates Phigaleia
(Arcadia).

[]{#index_split_002.html#p110}F

6

**Fabulinus**

beings. He is also the progenitor of fish stocks in Minor god of
infants. Roman. Responsible for the river Niger. His chief adversary is
the god of the first words of the child.

the desert wind, TELIKO. Faro is propitiated annually by a *Komo*
society of men in a ritual of dancing. They use a special mask which is
created **Faivarongo**

anew each year. According to legend Faro came God of mariners.
Polynesian \[Tikopia\]. The to earth after a long period of drought
during eldest son of a being known as Ariki Kafika which most of the
living things died. He also gave Tuisifo, he is a patron and guardian of
seafarers mankind the gift of speech.

and is also regarded as the origin of the royal Tikopian lineage. Also
known as the "grandsire of the ocean." He is closely linked with the
**Fauna**

chthonic god TIFENUA and the sky god ATUA I Minor vegetation goddess.
Roman. Consort of KAFIKA.

FAUNUS with guardianship of woods and plants.

**Faraguvol**

**Faunus**

Votive god. Puerto Rico and Haiti. The deified Minor vegetation god.
Roman. Consort of FAUNA trunk of a tree which is carried to a tribal
chief with guardianship of woods and plants. He was and presented. The
being represented, classed as given many of the attributes of the Greek
god a *ZEMI*, is considered to wander about and can PAN including horns
and legs of a goat.

escape from a closed bag or sack.

**Fe**

**Faro**

Tutelary god. Gai \[Ivory Coast, West Africa\]. By River god. Bambara
\[Mali, West Africa\]. Regarded tradition he arbitrated a dispute
between two as the deity who brought order to the world at the tribes,
the Chuilo and the Nyaio. The Nyaio were time of creation. He
impregnated himself and eventually defeated and Fe became specifically
gave birth to twins who were the first human the god of the Chuilo
people. He is propitiated by 95

[]{#index_split_002.html#p111}96 **Fe'e**

means of a dance in which a terrifying mask is with food, tools and
weapons. The sun and moon worn.

were engendered from his cheeks.

**Fe'e**

**FJORGYN**

God of the dead. Polynesian. Perceived as a giant **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic) region. Early fertility cuttlefish who was once subdued by
the god of goddess.

deep underground rocks. Part of the principle of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** Viking period Polynesian religion that every deity has a
superior (circa AD 700) or earlier to Christianization and and inferior
who have either bested, or been (circa AD 1100).

bested by, the other at some mythical time.

**SYNONYMS** possibly lord.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none known.

**ART REFERENCES** none known, but probably the **Fei Lian**

See FENG PO.

subject of anonymous carvings.

**LITERARY SOURCES** scant mention in various Icelandic codices. Fjorgyn
is referred to by Snorri **Felicitas**

in *Skaldskaparmal.*

Minor god. Roman. Linked with agricultural prosperity. Known
particularly from the second Practically nothing is known about Fjorgyn,
century BC.

though it is suggested that she is the mother of THOR. She may therefore
be lord by a different name. May also have been married to, or had a
**Feng Po**

brother by the same name (Fjorgyn). She is men-Sky god. Chinese.
Described as the "Count of tioned in the *Voluspa* of the *Poetic Edda*
and is the Wind," which he releases from a sack, he has probably the
model for the Wagnerian character strong links with the sea. He was
originally Erda.

regarded as malevolent and the antagonist of the Snorri Sturluson
suggests that a god Fjorgvin god Shen Yi. Feng Po may be depicted in
human (Fjorgynn) may have been the father of the god-form as an old man
with a white beard, or in the dess FRIGG.

guise of a dragon with the head of a bird or a deer. Also Fei Lian; Fei
Lien; Feng Bo.

**Flaitheas**

Tutelary goddess. Celtic (Irish). A name applied **Fides**

to the "Sovereignty of Ireland." By tradition Irish Minor god. Roman.
Identified with faith and loyalty.

rulers-designate were offered a cup called the A sanctuary was dedicated
to him in Rome circa 254

*dergflaith* to drink from, denoting their accept-BC. Symbolized by a
pair of covered hands.

ance as consort of the goddess.

**Fidi Mukullu**

**Flora**

Creator god. Bena Lulua \[Democratic Republic Goddess of flowers. Roman.
Consort of ZEPHYRUS

of Congo, central Africa\]. He provides mankind and chiefly worshiped by
young girls with offerings

[]{#index_split_002.html#p112}**FREYR** 97

of fruit and flowers. Her major festivals, with **ART REFERENCES** stone
carvings.

strongly sexual overtones but also identified with **LITERARY SOURCES**
Icelandic codices; *Prose: Edda* the dead, were celebrated in the spring
months (Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); inscriptions; from April 28
to early May and known as *Floralia.*

various place names.

Freyja is one of the most popular of the deities in **Forseti**

Asgard. A VANIR goddess, twin sister and/or wife God of unknown status.
Nordic (Icelandic). A of FREYR, and daughter of NJORD. A goddess of god
of Asgard said by Snorri to be the son of love concerned with affairs of
the heart, marriage BALDER and NANNA. According to an Icelandic and
prosperity. Much sought after by giants, and list of dwellings of the
gods, Forseti owned a gold reputed to have enjoyed sexual liaisons with
many and silver hall, Glitnir, and was a good law maker suitors,
including gods and elves. She drives a and arbiter of disputes. Also
Fosite (Friesian).

chariot pulled by two cats and is said to roam at night in the form of a
she-goat. She also rides upon a boar with golden bristles, the
Hildeswin.

**Fortuna**

Closely associated with death, according to some Goddess of good
fortune. Roman. A deity who legends she received half of those slain in
battle particularly appealed to women, partly in an orac-

(see OTHIN). A weeping goddess with tears of ular context. She is
depicted carrying a globe, gold, symbolized by the boar (see FRIGG), she
rudder and cornucopiae. She probably evolved wears a necklace with
ritual significance, the from the model of the Greek goddess TYCHE.

*Brisingamen.* Said to be able to take the shape of Her main symbol is
the wheel of fate which she a falcon and fly great distances. Associated
with a may stand upon and Renaissance artists tended to form of
witchcraft, *seior,* involving a seeress and depict her thus. Among her
more celebrated sanc-divination. Frigg and Freyja are possibly separate
tuaries in Rome, the temple of Fortuna Redux aspects of a single divine
principle.

was built by Domitian to celebrate his victories in Germany. She is
depicted in a well-known stone carving in Gloucester Museum, England,
holding **FREYR** *(lord)*

her three main attributes.

**ORIGIN** Possibly Swedish or Germanic but extending throughout the
Nordic region with lowest popularity in Iceland. Fertility god.

**FREYJA**

*(lady)*

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic) or Germanic. Fertility AD 700) and earlier, until
Christianization (circa and vegetation goddess.

AD 1100).

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa **SYNONYMS** none
confirmed, but possibly AD 700) and earlier, until after
Christianization including Frodi (Denmark); YNG or ING; Lytir (circa AD
1100)**. SYNONYMS** Gefn (giver); (Sweden).

Mardoll; Syr (sow); Horn; Skialf; possibly **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Uppsala
(Sweden), Thrand-Thorgerda in some parts of the north.

heim (Norway) and various temples and **CENTER(S) OF CULT** principally
in Sweden and shrines throughout the Nordic countries Norway, but spread
throughout the Nordic (none surviving).

region.

**ART REFERENCES** stone carvings.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p113}98 **FRIGG**

**LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* **ART REFERENCES**
stone carvings.

(Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); Adam of Bre-LITERARY SOURCES
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* men; inscriptions; place names.

(Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); inscriptions; place names.

One of the VANIR gods inhabiting Asgard, and concerned with the
fertility, prosperity and peace The senior AESIR goddess living in
Asgard; con-of the world. The twin of FREYJA and one of the sort of
OTHIN and mother of BALDER. Saxo children of NJORD. Married to the
giantess Gerd, implies that she had been the unfaithful spouse a liaison
interpreted by some as representing the but generally she was revered as
a regal consort marriage of a sky god with the earth resulting in and
"queen of heaven." The Germanic version of the harvest. He was,
according to the writer Adam her name, Frija, is the origin of Friday.
She is of Bremen, represented in the cult temple at thought to have been
closely concerned with Uppsala by a dramatically ithyphallic statue. The
childbirth and midwifery. She may also have Freyr cult was possibly
accompanied by a sacred headed a group of shadowy female deities to
marriage and he was regarded as the progenitor of whom carved stones
were often erected in pre-the royal Swedish Ynglinge dynasty. According
to Christian Europe (Roman *matrones*) associated the *Flateyjarbok*
(Icelandic), the statue of Freyr with fertility and protection of the
household.

was carried around the countryside in a covered Such stones are
generally found in the Rhineland.

wagon with an attendant priestess to bless the A weeping goddess
occasionally described as tak-seasons. Other festivals may have included
a riting the shape of a falcon (see FREYJA).

ual drama in which male attendants dressed in effeminate costumes.

Freyr enjoys very ancient links with the boar, **Fu Shen**

considered to possess protective powers, and he God of luck. Chinese. He
is often linked in had a sacred animal with golden bristles called
iconography with TSAI SHEN, god of wealth, and Gullinborsti. A sacred
stable is described at SHOU LAO, god of longevity. Usually depicted
Thrandheim, one of the centers of a horse cult with his son, and wearing
blue robes, which sig-with which he was also strongly identified. Freyr
nify his official position.

is also associated with a ship cult based on the notion of a phantom
vessel, Skidbladnir or Skioblaonir, large enough to hold all the gods
but **Fujin**

small enough to fold into a man's pocket.

God of winds. Shinto \[Japan\]. Depicted carrying a sack on his shoulder
which contains the four winds.

**FRIGG**

**ORIGIN** Nordic (Icelandic) or Germanic. Mother goddess.

**Fukurokuju**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa God of luck. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of seven deities AD 700) and earlier, until
Christianization (circa in Shintoism concerned with fortune. He is AD
1100).

allegedly a Chinese hermit who lived during the **SYNONYMS** Frija
(Germanic).

Sung dynasty and whose name means happiness, **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
various around Nordic wealth and longevity. He is depicted as a little
old region.

man, bald and with a prominent high forehead.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p114}**Futsu-Nushi-No-Kami** 99

He carries a book of sacred teachings tied to his cave could begin. He
collected together various staff. Other occasional attributes include a
crane, magical objects, pushed forward the perfect deer or tortoise.

divine mirror, recited the sacred liturgy and begged Amaterasu never
again to hide her face.

The guardian of Prince NINIGI, ancestor of the **Fulla**

imperial dynasty, Futo-Tama is more specifically Minor goddess.
Germanic. Identified in the sec-the ancestor of the Imba clan in Japan.

ond *Merseburg Charm* as an attendant of the goddess FRIGG and possibly
her sister.

**Futsu-Nushi-No-Kami**

God of war. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of two deities **Futo-Tama**

who made the way clear for Prince NINIGI to Ancestral god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. A significant deity descend to earth and begin the imperial
dynasty.

in mythology because he took part in the divina-A tutelary deity of
swordsmen and judoka artists.

tion and ritual necessary before the process of Linked with the god
TAKE-MIKA-DZUCHI--

drawing the sun goddess AMATERASU out of her NO-KAMI.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p115}G

6

**Gabija**

**GAIA** *(earth)*

Fire goddess. Pre-Christian Lithuanian. She was **ORIGIN** Greek.
Archetypal earth mother.

invoked by tossing salt on to a sacred flame.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1500 BC until Christianization (circa
AD 400).

**SYNONYMS** Gaea; Ge; Terra.

**Gabjauja**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** oracle at Delphi.

Corn goddess. Pre-Christian Lithuanian. She **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and reliefs.

was degraded to an evil demonic presence after **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Theogony, Hymn to Gaia* in Christianization.

the so-called Homeric hymns (Hesiod); Aristo-phanes.

**Gad**

Gaia is an ancient pre-Hellenic goddess who was God of uncertain status.
Western Semitic mainly revered in Attica. She is the primordial and
Punic (Carthaginian). Probably concerned essence of the earth, one of
the creations of with chance or fortune and known from AETHER and
Hedera, the primordial beings of the Palmyrene inscriptions, and from
the *Vetus* cosmos. Through the encouragement of EROS

*Testamentum* in place names such as Baal-Gad she became the mother of
PONTOS (sea) and and Midal-Gad. Popular across a wide area OURANOS
(heaven). According to tradition, of Syrio-Palestine and Anatolia in
pre-through liaison with Ouranos, she also engen-Biblical times. Thought
to have been syn-dered the race of TITANS. By consorting with the
cretized ultimately with the Greek goddess underworld she created the
monstrous Typhon.

TYCHE.

Perceived as a placid and resilient goddess generally with some apathy
to the goings-on around her in the tale of beginnings. She had an oracle
at **Gaganaganja** *(treasury of ether)* Delphi that predated that of
APOLLO. Gaia was God. Buddhist. One of a group of BODHISATTVAS

later superseded by other divinities, but she main-

( *buddha-* designates). Color: yellow, red or gold.

tained a role presiding over marriage and the tak-Attributes: blue
lotus, book, jewel, lotus and wishing of oaths. In the *Iliad*,
Agamemnon cries to ing tree in a vase.

Zeus: "May Zeus, all highest and first of gods, be 100

[]{#index_split_002.html#p116}**GANESA** 101

witness first, then Gaia and Helios and the Furies **Ganaskidi**

*(humpback)*

underground who punish men for having broken God of harvests, plenty and
of mists. Navaho oaths."

\[USA\]. He is said to live at Depehahatil, a canyon In Hellenic times
Gaia became Da-meter or with many ruined cliff dwellings north of San
DEMETER, the corn mother whose daughter is Juan. According to tradition
he is the apotheosis KORE, the corn spirit. Her attributes include fruit
of a bighorn sheep. His priest wears a blue mask and cornucopiae.

with no hair fringe but with a spruce crown and collar. He has a black
bag on his back, filled out with a twig frame, that appears as a
deformity, **Gajavahana**

and he carries a staff.

God. Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil). A form of SKANDA who has an elephant as a
vehicle. Mainly from southern India. Attributes: cockerel and spear.

**Gandha** *(odor)*

Goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. In Lamaism one of the group of
MATARAS (mothers). Color: **Gal Bapsi** *('hook' god)* green. Attribute:
conch with sandalwood resin.

Local god. Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern India\]. Worshiped
particularly by the Bhils. To **Gandhari**

*(of Ghandhara)*

expiate sins, the penitent thrusts a hook into his Goddess of learning.
Jain \[India\]. One of sixteen back and is suspended from it on the day
when SASANADEVATAS headed by the goddess SARAS-the sun enters Aries.

VATI. May also be a VIDYADEVI *.*

**Galla**

**Gandha Tara** *(fragrance-Tara)* Minor underworld gods. Mesopotamian
(Sumer-Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Color: red.

ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Attendants of the Attribute: conch with
sandalwood resin.

goddess ERESˇKIGAL. Also Gallu.

**GANESA** *(lord of hosts)* **Ganapati** *(lord of hosts)* **ORIGIN**
Hindu (Epic and Puranic) \[India\]. God of 1. God. Hindu (Puranic). The
more commonly wisdom and prudence.

recognized name of the elephant god GANESA, **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa AD 400 onward particularly favored in western India.

until present.

2\. God. Buddhist (Mahayana). The name of a **SYNONYMS** GANAPATI.

deity influenced by the Hindu god Ganesa.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specific.

Depicted riding upon a rat or mouse and carrying **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally bronze but an assortment of attributes.

also stone. Reliefs.

**LITERARY SOURCES** late *Mahabharata* recensions and
*Brihaddharma-Purana* etc.

**Ganapatihrdaya** *(the heart of Ganapati)* Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). The SAKTI Ganesa is god of wisdom and art, a benign deity of
GANAPATI.

generally assumed to offer help when invoked to

[]{#index_split_002.html#p117}102 **Ganga**

overcome difficulties. He may have originated as her fall. She rides on
a fish or water monster. Color: a fertility god and as a *YAKSA* (local
forest deity).

white. Attributes: fly whisk, lotus and water jar.

His father is SˇIVA. His mother, PARVATI, is said to have created him
from the scurf of her skin. He is depicted in human form with an
elephant's head **Gangir**

(or, less frequently, up to five heads) and a trunk Goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian). One of (which removes obstacles), sometimes
bearing the seven daughters of the goddess Baba, known one tusk, on a
stout or obese body (which con-chiefly at Lagasˇ. Also, and more
properly, tains the universe). He has four arms which can Hegir-Nuna.

carry a large number of attributes but particularly a shell, a discus, a
mace and a water-lily. His **Garmangabis**

sacred animal is the bandicoot. He is called upon Tutelary goddess.
South Germanic. Invoked by before going on a journey, moving house or
open-the Suebi tribe to bring prosperity. She may be ing a new business.

linked with the north German goddess G

According to one legend his elephant head EFJON.

was gained after his mother had put him outside the house to guard the
doorstep while she took a **Garuda** ( *the devourer*) bath. He barred
the way to his father whereupon Archaic sun god and divine vehicle.
Hindu Sˇiva inadvertently decapitated him. His mother (Vedic).
Originally depicted as a solar deity, vowed to secure a head for him
from the first Garuda evolved into a bird-like human hybrid passing
creature, which happened to be an who became the deified mount of VISŇU.
Also a elephant. Another account suggests that Parvati chief adversary
of *nagas* (snake-like demons), took Ganesa to show him off to the gods
but that which he devours. In early depictions Garuda has SANI (Saturn)
burned his head to ashes and the a parrot's beak. Said to have been born
from an elephant's head was provided to save his life by a egg, the son
of Vinata and KASYAPA. Epithets compassionate VISŇU.

include Amrtaharana, Garutman, Tarksya. Attrib-Ganesa's great popularity
results in frequent utes: conch, club, lotus and nectar, but may also
appearance in temples devoted to other Hindu bear the attributes of
Visňu.

deities. Sculptures are sometimes painted red. He 2. Mount or *vahana*
of VAJRAPANI. Buddhist.

is also a common household guardian made pop-Attributes: flower,
horse-head, noose, skin and ular by his gentle nature.

staff. Three-eyed and three-headed.

**Ganga**

**Gatumdug**

River goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Guardian deity of Fertility goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian the Ganges. The elder daughter of HIMAVAN and and
Babylonian-Akkadian). The daughter of the MENA, she is the sister of
PARVATI and the consort sky god AN, she is the tutelary mother goddess
of VISŇU and AGNI. She is also the second consort of Lagasˇ.

of SˇIVA. Ganga is regarded as a symbol of purity and is frequently
depicted with Brahma washing the raised foot of VISŇU TRIVIKRAMA.
According to **Gaunab**

tradition she was a heavenly river brought to earth Malevolent god of
darkness. Khoi (Hottentot) and caught by Sˇiva in his hair to soften the
shock of

\[Namibia, southern Africa\]. The chief adversary

[]{#index_split_002.html#p118}**Gefjon** 103

of the creator god TSUNIGOAB. He was engaged **CENTER(S) OF CULT** none
specific but often asso-in a primordial struggle for supremacy during
ciated with tombs.

which Tsunigoab was wounded but eventually **ART REFERENCES** paintings
in Valley of the triumphed, consigning Gaunab to the so-called Kings,
etc.

"black heaven."

**LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid and coffin texts; New Kingdom religious
papyri including the Papyrus of Tentamun.

**Gauri**

*(whitish brilliant)*

1\. Goddess. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). Consort Geb, the offspring of
SˇU and TEFNUT, is a "third of the god VARUNA, said to have been created
at generation" deity of the ENNEAD in Heliopolis the churning of the
ocean of milk. An epithet of and, as the brother and consort of NUT,
becomes PARVATI as a goddess of the corn. Also a SAKTI of the father of
ISIS and OSIRIS in the Heliopolis Mahesvara, a minor aspect of SˇIVA.
Her attendant genealogy. Geb appears on papyri from the New animal is a
lion or a wolf. Attributes: fish, forest Kingdom typically wearing the
crown of Lower garland, image of GANESA, lotus, mirror, rosary, Egypt,
lying on the ground with his arms trident and water jar. Three-eyed.
Also Varuni.

stretched in opposite directions: "one to the sky, 2. Goddess. Buddhist.
One of eight GAURIS of one to the earth." When drawn with Nut, who is
terrible appearance. Attributes: head and noose.

a sky goddess, his penis is often erect and 3. Messenger goddess. Jain
\[India\]. A SASANADE-extended toward her. He may also be accompa-VATA.
Also one of sixteen VIDYADEVIS or god-nied by a goose (his sign in
hieroglyphic).

desses of learning headed by SARASVATI. Color: Geb is a vegetation god,
frequently colored white. Attribute: a hook.

green and with greenery sprouting from him. He **NOTE:** Gauri-Tara is a
distinct minor Buddhist is also seen as a god of healing, particularly
called Mahayana goddess.

upon for protection against scorpion stings. In a less benign context,
Geb reputedly snatches the souls of the dead and may imprison them
against **Gautama Buddha**

See BUDDHA.

passing into the afterlife. He is also a god concerned with judgment in
the dispute between HORUS and SETH. As Horus's father, he presided
**Gayatri**

over his crowning, and therefore continued to Personification of a hymn.
Hindu. The name of protect each rightful heir to the crown of Egypt.

a popular hymn in the *Rg Veda,* dedicated to the sun. Also the name of
one, possibly the second, of the consorts of BRAHMA.

**Gefjon**

*See also* SARASVATI.

Goddess of agriculture. Germanic and Nordic (Icelandic). One of the
AESIR deities and an attendant of the goddess FRIGG according to
tradition **GEB**

*(earth)*

mentioned by Snorri in the *Edda*. She bore four **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
Chthonic or earth god.

giant sons whom she turned into oxen and used **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** Old Kingdom them to plough a tract of land which was then
(circa 2600 BC) to end of Egyptian history (circa towed out to sea to
become Zeeland (Sjaeland).

AD 400).

She is also said to have founded a royal Danish **SYNONYMS** Seb
(erroneous).

dynasty. Also Gefiun.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p119}104 **Gemini**

**Gemini**

See DIOSKOUROI.

**Geus Urvan**

Cattle god. Persian \[Iran\]. The guardian of cattle who appears in the
guise of a cow.

**Genius**

God of men. Roman. The personification of creativity and strength in
mortal males, the **Ghantakarna** *(ears like bells)* counterpart of
JUNO. Roman religion also God of healing. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). An
dictated that every place had its guardian spirit, attendant of SˇIVA,
worshiped as a guardian against the *genius loci.*

diseases of the skin. Attributes: bell with noose, and hammer.

**NOTE:** there is also a poorly defined goddess **Gerra**

Ghantakarni.

God of fire. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). Derived from the
Sumerian GIBIL, he is the son of A

**Ghantapani** *(bell in hand)* NU and ANUNITU and becomes

largely syncretized with both E

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). One of the group of RRA and NERGAL.

*dhyanibodhisattva* (meditation *BUDDHAS*) *.* An emanation of
Vajrasattva. Color: white. Attribute: a bell.

**Gesťin-Ana**

Chthonic goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

**Ghasmari** *(voracious)* The sister of DUMUZI and consort of
Ningisida.

Goddess of terrifying appearance. Buddhist. One The so-called "heavenly
grape-vine," this minor of a group of eight GAURIS *.* Color: green.
Attrib-goddess is involved in the account of Dumuzi try-utes: staff with
bell.

ing to escape from his fate at the hands of INANA and ERESˇKIGAL. In her
house he is changed into a gazelle before being caught and finally
trans-Ghentu

ported to the underworld.

Minor god. Hindu. Known in northern India as the god who "sends the
itch."

**Gesťu**

Minor god of intellect. Mesopotamian (Sumer-Gibil

ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). According to Fire god. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian). The son of legend he was sacrificed by the great gods AN and
KI. By the Akkadian period he becomes and his blood was used in the
creation of known as GERRA.

mankind.

**Gibini**

**Geus Tasan**

Plague god. Gishu \[Uganda, East Africa\]. Associ-Cattle god. Persian
\[Iran\]. The creator of cattle.

ated with the smallpox god ENUNDU, he is pro-Sometimes considered to be
an aspect of AHURA pitiated with offerings of vegetables and is MAZDA.

symbolized by special trees planted near the house.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p120}**GOBNIU** 105

**Giltine**

**Glaucus**

Goddess of death. Pre-Christian Lithuanian. She Sea god. Roman.

is said to enter the house of a dying person, See also GLAUKOS.

dressed in a white gown, and suffocate them.

**Glaukos**

**Gish**

Sea god. Greek. Allegedly an impoverished fish-God of war. Kafir
\[Afghanistan\]. Known chiefly erman who ate a sea-grass with magical
proper-among the Kati people in the southern Hinties, dived into the
ocean and remained there as a dukush. Gish seems partly modeled on the
Aryan guardian deity of fishermen and their nets.

(Vedic) god INDRA (see also INDR). One of the See also PROTEUS.

offspring of the creator god IMRA, his mother is named as Utr; she
carried him for eighteen months before he wrenched himself from her
**Gleti**

belly, stitching her up with a needle. His consort Moon goddess. Fon
\[Benin, West Africa\]. The is the goddess SANJU. He slaughters with
great consort of the sun god LISA and the mother of a efficiency but is
considered lacking in graces and large number of minor astral deities,
the *gletivi,* intellect, emerging in a generally boorish light who
became the stars of heaven.

(see also THOR). His home is a fortress of steel atop a mythical walnut
tree propped up by his mother which provides nourishment and strength
**GOBNIU** *(smith)*

for his warriors. The rainbow is a sling with **ORIGIN** Celtic (Irish).
God of skills including ale-which he carries his quiver.

brewing.

Gish is associated chiefly with the villages of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** early times until Kamdesh and Shtiwe but has been worshiped
Christianization, circa AD 400.

throughout the Kafir region with the sacrifice of **SYNONYMS** Goibniu;
GOVANNON (Welsh).

hornless oxen, particularly prior to combat. A **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none specifically known.

feast was given in his honor if the outcome was **ART REFERENCES**
various monumental sculptures successful. Also Giwish.

and inscriptions.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Books of Invasions; Cycles of Kings.*

**Giszida**

Gobniu is known chiefly for his skills as a metal God. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Babylonian-smith and in brewing the immortal beer of the
Akkadian). See Nin-giszida.

gods. He fashions invincible magic weapons for *See also* NINGISZIDA.

the TUATHA DE DANANN. In his brewing activities he uses a vast bronze
caldron, a copy of which was housed in various sanctuaries and was
apparently **Gita**

at times associated with the ritual slaughter of Mother goddess.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One kings of Ireland. Gobniu forms part of a
triad of of a group of Astamataras (mothers). Color: red.

deities, the *Na tri dee dana* (three gods of skill), Attributes: Indian
gong and lute.

with Credne, a deity skilful in brazing, and Luchta.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p121}106 **Gonaqade't** **Gonaqade't**

**Grannus**

Sea god. Chilkat \[American north Pacific coast\].

God of healing. Romano-Celtic (Continental By tradition he brings power
and good fortune to Europe). The name appears across a wide area all who
see him. He appears in several guises, ris-generally associated with
medicinal springs and ing from the water as a gaily painted house inlaid
hot mineral waters, including sites at Aix-la-with blue and green
*Haliotis* shell, or as the head Chapelle, Grand (Vosges), Trier,
Brittany, and as of a huge fish, or as a painted war canoe. Gener-far
distant as the Danube basin. Grannus became ally depicted in art as a
large head with arms, paws syncretized with the Roman god APOLLO as and
fins.

Apollo Grannus, and baths were sometimes called *Aquae* Granni.

**Gon-Po Nag-Po**

God. Lamaist \[Tibet\]. See also MAHAKALA. Also **Gratiae**

Bram-zei gzugs-can; mGon-dkar; GUR-GYI-Goddesses. Roman. The
counterparts of the MGON-PO.

Greek Charites. Identified with the arts and generally depicted with
long flowing tresses, but otherwise naked.

**Goraknath**

Guardian god. Hindu. An *avatara* of Sˇiva, worshiped among cow-herders
and the founder of **Grdhrasya** *(face of a vulture)* the *gorakhnathi*
sect in Nepal.

Minor goddess. Buddhist.

**Govannon**

**Grismadevi** *(goddess of summer)* God of skills. Celtic (Welsh). Son
of the goddess Seasonal goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. Also DON.

an attendant of S

*See also* G

RIDEVI. Usually accompanied by

OBNIU.

a yak. Color: red. Attributes: ax and cup.

**Grahamatrka** *(demon mother)* Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). One of
the forms **Gugulanna**

of VAIROCANA. Attributes: arrow, bow, lotus and Minor underworld deity.
Mesopotamian (Sumer-staff. Three-headed.

ian). The consort of the goddess ERESˇKIGAL, mentioned as the pretext on
which the fertility goddess INANA descends to the netherworld.

**Gramadevata**

Generic term for a local tutelary deity. India. Such deities are
identified as "not being served by Brah-Gujo

man priests." Most are goddesses e.g. CAMUNDA, Tutelary guardian deity.
Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. A DURGA and KALI. Generally they are invoked in
god of whom there is nothing other than a pass-small villages where they
guard boundaries and ing reference from among the extinct southern
fields and are represented by a painted stone, but Hindukush tribe of
Pachags. He may have been a they are also to be found in larger towns
and cities.

local consort of the messenger goddess Zhiwu.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p122}**Gusilim** 107

**Gukumatz**

Her cult bears some similarity to that of the Greek Sky god. Mayan
(Quiche, classical Mesoameri-mother goddess DEMETER and to Tantric cults
in can) \[Guatemalan highlands\]. The son of the India. For this reason
the cult is thought to have creator gods E QUAHOLOM and E ALOM, and been
introduced from Asia to Arnhem Land and equating to the feathered
serpent god of Aztec then to other parts of the Australian continent as
religion, QUETZALCOATL.

early as the sixth century. Mythology indicates that Gunabibi has been
perceived as a deity who came from the sea or the rivers during the
Dreamtime **Gula** *(great one)*

but who reigns now over dry land. Among modern Goddess of healing.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian aborigines she is the subject of esoteric rituals
which and Babylonian-Akkadian). Consort of NINURTA.

also involve the great serpent Yulunggul with whom Her animal is the
dog. She may be synonymous Gunabibi has been closely involved.

with NIN'INSINA. Also mentioned in Hellenistic Babylonian times. A Gula
temple is described at Uruk. Also NINTINUGGA.

**Gunnodoyak**

Iroquois (North American Indian). A youthful heroic deity who was once
mortal. He was **Gul-Sěsˇ**

empowered by the spirit of thunder, Hino, to Collective name for
goddesses of fate. Hittite.

conquer the Great Water Snake, enemy of They dispense good or evil, life
or death. Also humankind. The serpent devoured Gunnodoyak Hutena
(Hurrian).

but was then slain by Hino, who cut open the snake, recovered the body
of Gunnodoyak and returned him to his rightful place in heaven.

**Gulsilia Mata**

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A SAKTI who in later Hinduism
became regarded as **Gunura**

of evil intent, inflicting sickness. Particularly Deity of uncertain
status. Mesopotamian (Sumer-known from Bengal.

ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Described variously as the husband of the
goddess NIN'INSINA and the father of Damu (DUMUZI), but also as the
**Gundari-Myoo**

sister of Damu.

Japanese Buddhist. The terrific manifestation of the *DHYANIBUDDHA*
RATNASAMBHAVA. He bears three eyes and fangs. His eight arms and legs
are **Gur-Gyi Mgon-Po**

decorated with snakes. Attributes include a skull God of tents.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. A form on the hair and he stands on a lotus.

of MAHAKALA usually attended by a man. Color: blue. Attributes: club,
cup and knife.

**Gunabibi**

Creator goddess. Australian aboriginal. Also known **Gusilim** *(loud
voice)* as Kunapipi, she is extensively revered by aborigines God.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

in northern Australia, including the Yolngu people.

*See also* ISŤARAN.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p123}108 **Gwydion** **Gwydion**

**Gwynn Ap Nudd**

God of war. Celtic (Welsh). His mother is DON the Chthonic underworld
god. Celtic (Welsh).

Welsh mother goddess. He allegedly caused a war Known locally from South
Wales. The leader of between Gwynedd and Dyfed. He visited the court the
phantom hunt which chases a white stag. He of PRYDERI, son of RHIANNON,
in Dyfed, and stole equates with HERNE in England and ARAWN in his pigs.
In the ensuing combat Gwydion used more northern parts of Wales.

magic powers and slew Pryderi. He seems to have underworld links, hence
the route taken by the dead, the Milky Way, was named Caer Gwydion.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p124}H

6

**Ha**

during his remarkable reign. The place of his birth Guardian god.
Egyptian. Early deity of the westwas marked by a sanctuary and several
centuries ern Sahara referred to as warding off enemies after his death,
a vision of a child KAMI appeared (possibly Libyan) from the west.
Depicted in there to a priest. The *kami* identified himself by the
anthropomorphic form crowned by the symbol of Chinese ideogram
representing the name Hachi-desert dunes.

man, and thus the link developed. The site is, today, the location of a
magnificent shrine, the Umi-Hachiman-Gu, where Hachiman has been
**Hachacyum** *(our very lord)* perceived as a god of war. Soldiers
departing for Creator god. Mayan (Lacandon, classical battle once took
with them relics from the shrine.

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The creator of the Hachiman is also a deity of
peace and a world assisted by three other deities, his consort guardian
of human life and, when pacifism dom-and two brothers, one of whom is
Sucunyum, his inated Japan during the post-war era, he became
counterpart (or alter ego) in the underworld. Also more strongly
identified in the latter context.

Nohochacyum (our great lord).

**Hadad**

**Hachiman**

Weather god. Western Semitic (Syrian and God of war and peace. Shinto
\[Japan\]. A deity Phoenician). Derived from the Akkadian deity whose
origins are confused. The name does not ADAD. In texts found at the site
of the ancient appear in either of the sacred texts of Shintoism,
Canaanite capital of Ugarit \[Ras Sˇamra\] , the but such a deity was
probably worshiped in the name of Hadad apparently becomes a substitute
distant past with the alternative title of Hime-for that of BAAL. His
voice is described as roaring Gami or Hime-O-Kami. The cult center was
on from the clouds and his weapon is the thunder-the southern island of
Kyushu at Usa. In modern bolt. His mother is the goddess ASĚRAH.

Shintoism, Hachiman originates as a member of During Hellenic times he
was predominantly the imperial dynasty. Named Ojin-Tenno and born
worshiped at Ptolemais and Hierapolis. His Syrin AD 200 to the empress
Jingu-Kogo, he greatly ian consort is ATARGATIS, who overshadowed him
improved the living standards and culture of Japan in local popularity
at Hierapolis. Statues of the 109

[]{#index_split_002.html#p125}110 **HADES**

two deities were carried in procession to the sea carrying a two-pronged
harpoon or a scepter, and twice yearly. According to the Jewish writer
Jose-a key. He may be called Plutos, although the lat-phus, Hadad also
enjoyed a major cult following ter is generally regarded as a distinct
deity.

at Damascus in the eighth and ninth centuries BC. By the third century
BC the Hadad-Atargatis cult had extended to Egypt, when he becomes
**Hahana Ku** *(much rains house god)* identified as the god SUTEKH. In
the Greek tra-Messenger god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerica) dition his
consort becomes HERA.

\[Mexico\]. According to tradition, when the god *See also* ADAD.

HACHACYUM decides to send rain he directs Hahana Ku to visit the black
powder maker MEN-ZABAC. Hahana Ku buys only a small quantity, **HADES**
*(the invisible one)* against the wishes of the vendor.

**ORIGIN** Greek. God of death.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1500 BC until Christianization (circa

**Hahanu**

AD 400).

God of uncertain function. Mesopotamian (Sumer-SYNONYMS Aidoneus
(Roman); Dis; PLUTOS; O

ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Known from pass-RCUS (Roman).

ing reference in texts and from inscriptions.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** restricted to Pylos.

**ART REFERENCES** none specific.

**LITERARY**

**SOURCES** *Odyssey, Iliad* (Homer); **Haili'laj**

*Theogony* (Hesiod).

Plague god. Haida Indian \[Queen Charlotte Island, Canada\].
Particularly associated with Hades is the son of KRONOS and RHEA and may
be smallpox. Believed to be so terrible that he is not perceived as the
chthonic form of ZEUS; he is also even propitiated with food. He sails
in a canoe of the consort of PERSEPHONE (KORE). Since all pre-pestilence
with huge sails like those of the white cious metals and stones lie
buried in the earth, he man's ships which brought plague to the Indians.

is also the god of riches. He rides in a black chariot drawn by four
black horses. His home in the underworld is the House of Ais. The
closely **Hakea**

guarded gates of his kingdom, also called Hades, Goddess of the
underworld. Polynesian, Hawaii.

are identified in the *Odyssey* as lying beyond the Her role was
generally shared with the chthonic ocean at the edge of the world and in
the *Iliad* as goddess Miru.

lying directly beneath the earth. Through Hades run the rivers Styx,
beside which the gods made their hallowed oaths, and Lethe, with its
waters of **Hala**

forgetfulness. In the *Odyssey* the rivers are identified Goddess of
healing. Kassite \[Iraq\]. Probably later as the Pyriphlegethon and
Kokytos (a tributary of syncretized with the Akkadian goddess GULA.

the Styx) both of which flow into the Acheron.

Hades abducts Persephone (Kore), the daughter of DEMETER, and brings her
to the under-Halahala *(lord of poison)* world to reign as his queen for
four months in God of poison. Buddhist (Mahayana). A form of every year.
He is depicted as a dark-bearded god AVALOKITESVARA. Typically seated on
a red lotus

[]{#index_split_002.html#p126}**Hanui--o--rangi** 111

with the SAKTI on the left knee. Color: white.

their lifestyle. Attributes include a basket of flow-Attributes: arrow,
bow, cup, grass, image of ers and a flute.

AMITABHA on crown, lotus, tiger skin and trident.

*See also* BA XIAN.

Three-headed and three-eyed.

**Hani(s)**

**Haldi**

Minor god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian).

Tutelary god. Urartian \[Armenia\]. Known from The attendant of ADAD and
linked with SULLAT.

circa 1000 BC until circa 800 BC.

**Hani-Yasu-Hiko**

**Halki** ( *barley*)

God of potters. Shinto \[Japan\]. The consort of Corn god. Hittite and
Hurrian. He may also have HANI-YASU-HIME, he is one of the clay deities
made been invoked by beer makers.

from the faeces of the primordial goddess IZANAMI.

**Hamadryades**

**Hani-Yasu-Hime**

Animistic tree spirits. Greco-Roman. Vaguely Goddess of potters. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The consort defined female beings whose existence is of
HANI-YASU-HIKO, she is one of the clay deities restricted to the
individual trees of which they made from the faeces of the primordial
goddess are guardians.

IZANAMI.

**Hamavehae**

**Hannahannas**

Mother goddesses. Romano-Celtic (Rhineland).

Mother goddess. Hittite and Hurrian. Described A trio of *matres* known
from inscriptions.

as the "great mother." In the legend of TELEPINU, the missing god, she
sends a bee to locate him.

When the bee stings Telepinu to awaken him, the **Hammon**

god vents his rage on the natural world.

God of the evening sun. Libyan. An ancient deity **NOTE:** the
priestesses of the Phrygian mother depicted with ram's horns.

goddess KYBELE were, according to the Roman writer Lactantius,
*melissai* or bees.

**Hammu Mata**

Mother goddess. Hindu. Locally worshiped by **Hansa** *(goose)*

the Bhils.

Minor *avatara* of VISŇU. Hindu (Puranic).

Depicted in the form of a goose.

**Han Xiang-zi**

Immortal being. Taoist (Chinese). One of the **Hanui-o-Rangi** *(father
of winds)*

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology. Once God of winds and weather.
Polynesian. He is the mortal beings, they achieved immortality through
son of the sky god RANGINUI, who fathered him

[]{#index_split_002.html#p127}112 **Hanuman** on one of his early
consorts, Pokoharua, the sis-sees the annual inundation of the Nile
valley. His ter of TANGAROA, the sea god. All the subsequent court
includes crocodile gods and frog goddesses.

descendants of Hanui-o-Rangi are believed to There are no known
sanctuaries to Hapy. He is rule over various aspects of the weather.
Hanui depicted in anthropomorphic form but androgy-thus fathered
Tawhiri, the god of the northwest nous, with prominent belly, pendulous
breasts wind, whose son was Tiu. They control the fierce and crowned
with water plants. He may hold a storms from the east. The children of
Tiu include tray of produce. At Abydos he is depicted as a
Hine-I-Tapapauta and Hine-Tu-Whenua, the two-headed goose with human
body.

deities overseeing the more gentle westerly winds.

*See also* KHNUM.

Hine-Tu-Whenua is the mother of Hakona-Tipu and Pua-I-Taha, controlling
the southern and southwesterly gales.

**Hara** *(destroyer)*

Epithet of SˇIVA. Hindu (Puranic). Also one of the EKADASARUDRAS (eleven
rudras).

**Hanuman** *(with large jaws)* Monkey god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).
Hanuman attends RAMA, one of the incarnations of **Hara Ke**

VISŇU, and personifies the ideal and faithful ser-Goddess of sweet
water. Songhai \[Niger, West vant. He is the son of PAVANA, the god of
winds, Africa\]. Considered to live beneath the waters in and is noted
for his speed and agility in which tributaries of the river Niger,
attended by two context he is often worshiped by young men and dragons,
Godi and Goru. The spirits of the dead athletes. He leads a mythical
forest army of mon-are believed to live in a paradise city in the depths
keys, and is depicted as a monkey with a long tail.

of the Niger.

He takes a major role in the *Ramayana* epic searching for, and
rescuing, the goddess SITA who has been captured by the demon Ravana. He
may **Harakhti**

appear trampling on the goddess of Lanka \[Sri A form of the god HORUS.
Egyptian. The aspect Lanka\]. Worshiped particularly in southern India
of the god who rises at dawn in the eastern sky.

but more generally in villages. Color: red. Attrib-According to Pyramid
Texts, the king is born on utes: bow, club, mane, rock and staff. May
appear the eastern horizon as Harakhti, which contra-five-headed.

dicts the more commonly held belief that the king is the son of RE, the
sun god.

**Hao**

Creator god. Janjero \[Ethiopia\]. Personified by **Hara-Yama-Tsu-Mi**

the crocodile and considered to reside in the river Mountain god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Particularly the Gibe. He was propitiated with human
sacrifice.

deity of wooded mountain slopes.

**Hapy**

**Hardaul**

Fertility god of the Nile flood. Egyptian. Inhab-Plague god. Hindu. A
locally worshiped deity its caverns adjacent to the Nile cataracts and
over-known particularly in Bundelkhand, northern

[]{#index_split_002.html#p128}**Harpokrates** 113

India, as a protector against cholera and consid-Kingdom (circa
1550-1000 BC) identify the sphinx ered to have been an historical figure
who died in at Giza as Harmachis looking toward the eastern AD 1627.
Also a wedding god.

horizon. Also Har-em-akhet (Egyptian).

**Harendotes** *\[Greek\]*

**Harmonia**

Form of the god HORUS. Egyptian. Under this Goddess of joining.
Greco-Roman. Daughter name, Horus specifically guards and protects his
of ARES (MARS) and APHRODITE (VENUS) or father OSIRIS in death. He thus
becomes associ-Cytherea. The consort of Cadmus and mother ated with
sarcophagi and appears frequently in of Ino, SEMELE, Agave, Autonoe and
Polydorus.

coffin texts. Also Har-nedj-itef (Egyptian).

She is the apotheosis of harmony in life which is also displayed in
musical euphony. Also Hermione.

**Hari** *(yellowish brown)* Minor incarnation of the god VISŇU. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). Popularized by modern reli-Haroeris *\[Greek\]*

gious movements, Hari is one of the sons of the Form of the god HORUS as
a man. Egyptian. The god DHARMA who sprang from the heart of name
distinguishes the mature deity from HAR-BRAHMA. He is most closely
linked with KRSNA, POKRATES, the child Horus. In this form he but he and
Krsna also parallel Dharma's other avenges his father, OSIRIS, and
regains his sons, NARA and NARAYANA. Hari can be a more kingdom from
SETH, his uncle. He is depicted as generic epithet applied to several
Hindu gods.

the falcon god. Also Harueris; Har-wer (both Egyptian); HARENDOTES.

**Hariti** *(green or stealing)* 1. Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic).

**Harpina**

One of the group of MATARAS (mothers) who are River goddess. Greek.
Daughter of the river god the patrons of children. Considered by some to
be ASOPOS, she was seduced by ARES, who fathered identical with the
goddess Vriddhi. Her consort is Oenomaus (a king said to have reigned
near Pancika, alternatively KUBERA. In her destructive Olympia) on her.

aspect she steals and eats children. Particularly known from the north
and northwest of India.

Attribute: a child may be held at her hip, some-Harpokrates *\[Greek\]*

times being eaten.

Form of the god HORUS as a child. Egyptian.

2\. Plague goddess. Buddhist. Associated with Generally depicted sitting
on the knee of his smallpox. Also regarded in some texts as the
god-mother, the goddess ISIS, often suckling at the left dess of
fertility.

breast and wearing the juvenile side-lock of hair.

He may also be invoked to ward off dangerous creatures and is associated
with crocodiles, snakes **Harmachis** *\[Greek\]*

and scorpions. He is generally representative of Form of the god HORUS.
Egyptian. Harmachis is the notion of a god-child, completing the union
Horus as the sun god. Inscriptions from the New of two deities. Also
Har-pa-khered (Egyptian).

[]{#index_split_002.html#p129}114 **Harsa**

**Harsa** *(desire)*

senting rain. It is decorated with eagle and owl Goddess. Hindu. The
SAKTI of the god HRSIKESA.

feathers.

**Harsiese**

**Hastsbaka**

Form of the god HORUS. Egyptian. Specifically Male elder of the gods.
Navaho \[USA\]. Otherwise when personifying the child of ISIS and
OSIRIS.

of uncertain status. His priest wears a blue buck-According to the
Pyramid Texts, Harsiese per-skin mask with a fringe of hair, a spruce
collar forms the "opening of the mouth" rite for the dead and a scarlet
loin cloth with a leather belt deco-king.

rated with silver and with a fox pelt dangling from the back. He is
otherwise naked and painted white. He holds a whitened gourd rattle,
which **Harsomtus** *\[Greek\]*

may be decorated with spruce twigs, in his right Form of the god HORUS.
Egyptian. In this hand, and a wand of spruce in his left hand. Also form
Horus unites the northern and southern Yebaka.

kingdoms of Egypt. He is depicted as a child comparable with
HARPOKRATES. At the Edfu temple, he is identified thus as the offspring
of Horus the **Hastsebaad**

elder and HATHOR. Also Har-mau (Egyptian).

Chief of goddesses. Navaho \[USA\]. She is involved in rites of exorcism
and wields considerable influence. The six goddesses of the tribe all
wear iden-Hasameli

tical masks, and in ritual the part of the deity is God of metalworkers.
Hittite and Human.

played by a boy or small man wearing a mask Invoked by blacksmiths.

which covers the entire head and neck, and who is almost naked but for
an ornate scarf on the hips and a leather belt decorated with silver and
with **Hasta** *(hand)*

a fox pelt dangling behind. The skin is painted Minor goddess of
fortune. Hindu (Epic and white.

Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA* or astral goddess; daughter of DAKSA
and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Hastseltsi**

God of racing. Navaho \[USA\]. He organizes and **Hastehogan**

oversees athletic races. The priest who imper-Chief house god. Navaho
\[USA\]. Also a god of sonates him has to be a good runner and farming
identified with the west and the sky at challenges others, using
high-pitched squeaking sunset. Regarded as a benevolent deity who aids
calls. If the priest wins, the contender is whipped mankind and cures
disease. Believed to live in a with a yucca scourge. If the contender
wins, cave system near San Juan. He also has a malev-there is no
penalty! A fastidious deity who avoids olent aspect in which he can cast
evil spells. His contact with any unclean objects. His ceremo-priest
wears a blue mask, at the bottom of which nial mask is a domino shape
covering mouth and is a horizontal yellow band representing evening
throat with white shells over the eyes and light, with eight vertical
black strokes repre-mouth.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p130}**HATHOR** 115

**Hastseoltoi**

tribal lodge. His priest wears a buckskin mask Goddess of hunting.
Navaho \[USA\]. She may be decorated with owl feathers, and a spruce
collar, seen as the consort of the war god NAYENEZGANI.

but otherwise ordinary Navaho dress with white She carries two arrows,
one in each hand, and buckskin leggings.

wears a quiver and bow case. Navaho tradition dictates that no pictures
are drawn of this deity.

*See also* ARTEMIS.

**HATHOR**

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Mother goddess and goddess of love.

**Hastseyalti** *(talking elder)* **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from Old
Kingdom Chief of gods. Navaho \[USA\]. Not regarded as a (circa 2700
BC), but possibly earlier, until the creator deity, but god of the dawn
and the eastern end of Egyptian history (circa AD 400).

sky. Also guardian of animals in the hunt and, **SYNONYMS** none
significant.

possibly, of corn. Regarded as a benevolent deity **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Dendara, Giza, Thebes.

who aids mankind and cures disease. He also has **ART REFERENCES** wall
paintings from the major a malevolent aspect in which he can cast evil
sanctuary at Dendara; sculptures including an spells. His priest invokes
him in a ceremonial outstanding composition from the temple of dance
wearing a white mask with a symbol con-King Menkaure at Giza; reliefs in
the temple of sisting of a corn stalk with two ears. At the bottom Queen
Hatsheput at Thebes; other contempo-is a horizontal yellow band
representing evening rary sculpture and painting; sistrum rattles, etc.

light, with eight vertical black strokes represent-LITERARY SOURCES
*Book of the Dead,* Harris ing rain. Also Yebitsai.

Papyrus etc.

Hathor is a major Egyptian deity, with a benign **Hastsezini**

motherly nature and invariably depicted, in one God of fire. Navaho
\[USA\]. A "black" god who is form or another, as a cow goddess with
strong reclusive and generally apart from other deities.

sky associations. Her father is the sun god RE and He is the inventor of
fire and of the fire drill and she is often described as the mother of
all Egypt-board. His priest dresses in black and wears a ian pharaohs.
In early times evidence suggests black mask with white-bordered eye and
mouth that she was regarded as the mother of HORUS, holes. The
ceremonial fire drill is made from but once the OSIRIS legend gained
widespread cedarwood.

popularity, she came to bear a complex protective rather than maternal
relationship with Horus. In a conflicting tradition stemming from the
cult **Hatdastsisi**

center of Horus at Edfu in Upper Egypt, Hathor God. Navaho \[USA\]. A
benevolent deity, he cures is also drawn as Horus' consort. In the
legend of disease through the medium of his priest, who the "eye of Re,"
she shows a potentially destruc-flagellates the affected parts. His home
is believed tive nature, but this is an isolated instance.

to be near Tsegihi in New Mexico. Sacrifices to In art she may be
depicted as a cow, as in the Hatdastsisi are made up from reeds
decorated sculpture of her browsing among papyrus plants with a design
representing the blue yucca plant, and suckling the pharaoh Amenhotep II
from the which is buried in the earth to the east of the Hathor
sanctuary of Tuthmosis III, or in human

[]{#index_split_002.html#p131}116 **Hatmehyt** form wearing a hairstyle
which mimics the **Haubas**

Mesopotamian "omega" symbol (see NINHUR-Local god. Pre-Islamic southern
Arabian. Known SAG

˜ A). In the latter depiction she wears a crown from inscriptions.

which consists of a sun disc surrounded by the curved horns of a cow.
She is prominent thus in many of the royal tombs in the Valley of the
**Hauhet**

Kings at Thebes where she is seen as a funerary Primordial goddess.
Egyptian. One of the eight deity strongly linked with Re when he
descends deities of the OGDOAD, representing chaos, she is below the
western horizon. Hathor is also repre-coupled with the god HEH and
appears in anthro-sented, not infrequently, in the capitals of
archi-pomorphic form but with the head of a snake.

tectural columns. Like Ninhursag˜a she is The pair epitomize the concept
of infinity. She is associated with lions. Other symbols include the
also depicted greeting the rising sun in the guise papyrus reed and the
snake.

of a baboon.

Hathor is also a goddess of love and sexuality, and is associated with
the erotic aspects of music and dancing. Her priestesses carried
*sistrum* rat-Haukim

tles and *menat* "necklaces," both of which are Local god. Pre-Islamic
southern Arabian. Possibly percussion instruments used in cultic rites.
The a deity concerned with arbitration and the law.

pharaoh was the "son of Hathor" and every Egyptian princess
automatically became a priestess of the goddess. Many pharaonic tombs
and **Haumea**

magical papyri include description of "seven Mother goddess.
\[Hawaiian.\] She is the daughter Hathors" who predict the fate of a
child at birth of PAPATUANUKU, the primordial earth mother, and these
deities were often called upon in and is revered by many people of
Polynesia and spells.

by the Maori of New Zealand. Her more notable Hathor enjoyed great
popularity in Greco-children include PELE, the volcano goddess of Roman
culture and many elements in the makeup Hawaii, and HI'AIKA, the goddess
of the dance.

of the goddess APHRODITE are modeled on her As a deity responsible for
birth, Haumea pos-Egyptian style.

sesses a magical wand that she used at the time of creation to engender
fruit trees and fish. From time to time she uses it to replenish stocks.

**Hatmehyt**

*(she who leads the fishes)*

Mythology also identifies her as a heroine who Fertility and guardian
goddess of fish and fisher-saved herself and her consort from enemies at
men. Egyptian. Local deity whose cult center was the time of creation by
hiding in a breadfruit tree at Mendes \[Tell el-Ruba\] in the Nile
delta. She and fending off the attackers with poisonous sap is the
consort of the ram god BANEBDJEDET.

and wood splinters.

Depicted anthropomorphically, or as a fish.

**Haumiatiketike**

**Hatthi**

Vegetation god. Polynesian (including Maori).

Plague goddess. Hindu. Particularly associated The deity concerned with
wild plants gathered as with cholera in northwestern India.

food, and particularly with the rhizome of the

[]{#index_split_002.html#p132}**HEBAT** 117

bracken which has been traditionally relied on by **Hayasum**

the Maori in times of famine or need.

Minor god. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Known from
texts, but of uncertain function.

**Haurun**

Chthonic or earth god. Western Semitic (Canaanite). Haurun was
introduced to Egyptian **Hayasya**

religion probably by émigré workers who related 1. Horse god. Hindu.
Probably identical with him to the sculpture of the Sphinx at Giza.
Hau-Hayagriva.

run was known locally as a god of healing.

2\. Horse goddess. Buddhist. Attribute: the head of a horse.

**Hayagriva** *(horse neck)* 1. The most significant minor incarnation
of the **Hazzi**

god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). He prob-Mountain god. Hittite and
Hurrian. Invoked in ably originated as a horse god and later became an
Hittite treaties as a deity responsible for oaths. A *avatara*
associated with wisdom and knowledge.

deity of the same name was worshiped by the At the behest of BRAHMA,
Hayagriva rescued the Hurrians, but not necessarily in the same
con-Vedas, stolen by two demons, from the bottom of text.

the primeval ocean. Depicted in human form with the head of a horse and,
according to the texts, eight hands. Attributes: book (Veda), horse's
mane **He Xian-gu**

and rosary. Also the attributes of Visňu. Also Immortal being. Taoist
(Chinese). One of the Hayasirsa, Vadavavaktra.

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, she was 2. Patron god of horses.
Buddhist-Lamaist once a mortal being who achieved immortality

\[Tibet\]. One of a group of DHARMAPALA with ter-through her lifestyle.
The tutelary goddess of rible appearance and royal attire, he is
considered housewives and the only female deity among the to be an
emanation of AKSOBHYA or AMITABHA.

group. Attributes include a ladle, lotus and peach His SAKTI is MARICI.
Color: red. Attributes: horse fruit.

heads, staff and trident, but also arrow, ax, banner, bow, club, flames,
flower, image of Aksobhya or Amitabha on the crown, lotus, noose, prayer
wheel, **He Zur** *(the great white one)* skin, snakes, sword and
trident. Three-eyed.

Baboon god. Egyptian. Known from the Old Kingdom and regarded as a
manifestation of Thot.

**Haya-Ji**

God of winds. Shinto \[Japan\]. Particularly the fierce god of
whirlwinds and typhoons. In **HEBAT**

mythology he carried back to heaven the body of **ORIGIN** Hittite and
Hurrian \[Anatolia\]. Patron AME-WAKA-HIKO (the heavenly young prince)
goddess and mother goddess.

after he had been slain by an arrow from the **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
2000 BC or earlier

"heavenly true deer bow."

until 1300 BC or later.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p133}118 **Hebe**

**SYNONYMS** possibly Hepatu; HANNAHANNAS; **Hegemone**

KUBABA.

Greek. The name given to one of the GRATIAE in **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Hattusas \[Boghazköy and the traditions of Athens.

Yazilikaya\]; Arinna; other sanctuaries within the Hittite Empire
extending down into the north Syrian plain.

**Heh**

**ART REFERENCES** seals and seal impressions; Primordial god. Egyptian.
One of the eight sculptures; monumental rock carvings.

deities of the OGDOAD, representing chaos, he is **LITERARY SOURCES**
cuneiform and hieroglyphic coupled with the goddess HAUHET and appears
in texts from Boghazköy, etc.

anthropomorphic form but with the head of a frog. The pair epitomize the
concept of infinity.

Hebat was adopted from the Hurrian pantheon He is also depicted greeting
the rising sun in the as the principal goddess of state religion in the
guise of a baboon. In another context he is Hittite Empire, though
because of name changes depicted kneeling, frequently on a basket which
her precise role is not always clear. She is represents the hieroglyph
for universality. He described as the "great goddess." In some texts may
carry the *ankh* symbol and hold palm rubs in she is also the "sun
goddess of ARINNA" (a reli-each hand.

gious center near Boghazköy thus far lost to archaeology) but her
relationship to the sun god, in one fragmentary text called Kumarbi and
**HEIMDALL** *(earth-watcher)* described as the king of the gods, god of
right **ORIGIN** Nordic (Icelandic). Of uncertain status and justice, is
unclear. She is more intimately but probably a guardian deity.

linked with the weather god TESˇUB, "king of **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
Viking period (circa heaven, lord of the land of Hatti" and god of
bat-AD 700) and earlier, through to Christianization tle who, according
to the same legend, displaced (circa AD 1100). **SYNONYMS** Mardall;
possibly KUMARBI as king of the gods.

Rig; "the white god."

Hebat is often drawn as a matronly figure, with-CENTER(S) OF CULT none
known.

out weapons, but generally in company with a **ART REFERENCES** none
known but probably the lion. In a famous procession of gods carved on
subject of anonymous carvings.

rock faces at Yazilikaya, the leading goddess is **LITERARY SOURCES**
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* called Hepatu.

(Snorri); place names.

**NOTE:** these sanctuaries were often created where vertical rock
facades suitable for carving Heimdall is an enigmatic deity to whom
there is relief sculptures existed near water.

considerable reference in the codices. He is drawn as the sentry or
guardian, a tireless watcher over Asgard, needing no sleep and able
**Hebe**

to see in the darkest of nights. According to Goddess of youth. Greek.
The daughter of ZEUS

mythology, he lives beside the rainbow bridge and HERA and the consort
of HERAKLES. The connecting Asgard with the other realms. His cup-bearer
of the gods of Olympus. In the Roman symbol is the Gjallarhorn which is
used to alert pantheon she becomes JUVENTAS.

the gods to the onset of Ragnarok (doom). He

[]{#index_split_002.html#p134}**Helen** 119

came also to be associated with guardianship of **Heket**

the world tree (Yggdrasil). Said to be born of Frog goddess concerned
with birth. Egyptian.

nine giantesses, the waves of the sea (see AEGIR) Minor deity who by
some traditions is the con-and in some legends he is the father of
mankind.

sort of HAROERIS ( *see also* HORUS). Texts refer to The *Voluspa*
(Codex Regius) begins with the a major sanctuary at Tuna et-Gebel which
has words: "Hear me, all ye hallowed beings, both been totally
obliterated. The remains of another high and low of Heimdall's
children." Heimdall sanctuary survive at Qus in Upper Egypt. In the has
close links with FREYJA and his synonym Pyramid Texts she is referred to
as a deity who Mardall parallels Mardoll (see Freyja). He may eases the
final stages of labor. Depicted as wholly even have been a VANIR god.
Said to have fought frog-like or as a frog-headed human figure, often a
sea battle with LOKI.

found on amulets or other magical devices associated with childbirth.

**HEKATE**

**ORIGIN** Greek. Goddess of the moon and of **Hel**

pathways.

Chthonic underworld goddess. Germanic and **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 800 BC until Nordic (Icelandic). The daughter of LOKI and
Christianization (circa AD 400).

the giantess Angrboda, and the sibling of both **SYNONYMS** Hecate.

the Midgard worm who will cause the sea to flood the world with the
lashings of his tail, and of Fen-CENTER(S) OF CULT Lagina.

rir, the phantom wolf who will swallow the sun, at **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and reliefs.

Ragnarok. She is queen of the otherworld, also **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Theogony* (Hesiod) etc.

known as Hell, and she takes command of all who Hekate is the daughter
of Perses and Asteria die, except for heroes slain in battle, who ascend
to Valhalla. In some mythologies she is depicted and is subsequently
honored by ZEUS as a godas half black and half white. She was adopted
into dess. She is the mother of Scylla and is specifi-British mythology.

cally a goddess of pathways and crossroads traveled by night. Artistic
representations show her carrying torches. Where paths met, a triple
**Helen**

figure of Hecate rose from masks placed at the Goddess \[Greek\]
associated with the city of Troy.

junction. Offerings were left in roadside shrines Helen is frequently
alleged, in Homeric tradition, and at junctions. In later times she
tended to to have been a mortal heroine or a demigoddess.

become syncretized with the goddess ARTEMIS.

In his *Catalogues of Women* Hesiod, the Greek Hekate is also the patron
of Medea and other contemporary of Homer and author of the witches, and
in some parts of Thessaly she was definitive *Theogony* of the Greek
pantheon, con-worshiped by occult bands of female moon-founds tradition
by making Helen the daughter worshipers. In variations of the DEMETER
leg-of ZEUS and Ocean. Other Greek authors con-ends Hekate plays a part
in the return of temporary with Hesiod give Helen's mother as PERSEPHONE
from HADES. She is also invoked NEMESIS, the Greco-Roman goddess of
justice as a bestower of wealth and favor.

and revenge, who was raped by Zeus. The

[]{#index_split_002.html#p135}120 **HELIOS**

mythology placing Helen as a demigoddess **Hemantadevi**

identifies her mother as Leda, the mortal wife of Goddess of winter.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Tyndareus, also seduced by Zeus who fathered One of several seasonal
deities. Also an attendant POLLUX as Helen's brother. However Hesiod of
Sridevi. Usually accompanied by a camel.

strongly denied these claims.

Color: blue. Attributes: cup and hammer.

Homeric legend describes Helen's marriage to King Menelaus of Sparta and
her subsequent abduction by Paris, said to have been the catalyst
**Hendursaga**

for the Trojan War. After her death, mythology God of the law.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and generally places her among the stars with the
Babylonian-Akkadian). He was titled by Gudea of Dioscuri (sons of Zeus),
better known as Castor Lagasˇ"herald of the land of Sumer."

and Pollux, the twins of the Gemini constellation. Helen was revered on
the island of Rhodes as the goddess Dendritis.

**HEPHAISTOS**

*See also* DISKOURI.

**ORIGIN** Greco-Roman, perhaps preceded by Etruscan. God of fire and
smithies.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1500 BC until **HELIOS**

Christianization (circa AD 400).

**ORIGIN** Greek. Sun god.

**SYNONYMS** Hephaestus (Roman).

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 800 BC in **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
sanctuaries on Lemnos and, Greece (but an adoption from much earlier
from circa 450 BC, in Athens opposite the times), until Christianization
(circa AD 400).

Acropolis on the hill above the Agora. Also a **SYNONYMS** none.

significant shrine at Ephesus.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Rhodes.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and reliefs.

**ART REFERENCES** *Colossus* of Rhodes (lost); other **LITERARY**

**SOURCES** *Iliad, Odyssey* (Homer); sculptures.

*Theogony* (Hesiod).

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Odyssey* (Homer); *Theogony* (Hesiod).

One of the twelve major deities of Olympus, Hephaistos is one of the
sons of HERA who, in Helios is not specifically a Greek deity, since
disappointment at having borne a child with the concept of a sun god was
more or less deformed legs, threw him to earth where he was universal in
the ancient world, but in the taken in and cared for by the people of
Lemnos.

*Theogony* he is identified as the son of In spite of physical
disabilities, which set him HYPERION and his sister Euryphaessa. He
drives apart from the other, physically perfect, deities the chariot of
the sun by day and descends of Olympus, Hephaistos draws on peculiar
pow-beneath the ocean at night. On Rhodes, ers in the making of metal
objects, which often allegedly the site of the largest Greek statue of
possess magical qualities. He fathered the race of a deity, the
so-called Rhodes "Colossus" cast in arcane *KABEIROI* blacksmith gods.
The Hephaistos bronze, there was a celebrated festival of Helios cult
may have originated on the island of Lemnos during which a chariot with
four horses was with a tribal group the Greeks knew as Tyrsenoi.

driven off a cliff, symbolizing the setting of the Hephaistos consorted
briefly with ATHENA, who sun into the sea.

subsequently gave birth to Erichthonos, the first

[]{#index_split_002.html#p136}**HERAKLES** 121

king of Athens. In the *Odyssey* he is said to be the As stepmother to
Zeus's illegitimate children, consort of APHRODITE. In the *Iliad* he is
married Hera displays a jealous and malicious character, to CHARIS
(Grace). He made a famous shield for directing her anger at HERAKLES and
DIONYSOS

Achilles which was said to reflect the world and all in particular. In a
fire festival practiced in Boeo-that was in it.

tia to the "great Daedala," wooden images were burned to enact a legend
whereby Plataea, one of Zeus's concubines, was stripped naked,
humili-HERA

ated and immolated by a jealous Hera.

**ORIGIN** Greek. The wife of Zeus.

During a New Year festival, the *Heraia,* to **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 800 BC, but honor Hera, her priestesses were carried to the
probably earlier, until Christianization (circa sanctuary on a cart
drawn by oxen which also AD 400).

presumably contained a statue of the goddess.

**SYNONYMS** none.

Traditionally a women's games festival dedicated **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Plataea (Boeotia) and others.

to Hera was also held on Olympus every four **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and carvings.

years.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Iliad* (Homer); *Theogony* (Hesiod).

As the long-suffering, but also jealous and quar-HERAKLES *(the fame of
Hera?)* relsome, wife of the philandering and all-powerful **ORIGIN**
Greek. Heroic god.

god ZEUS, HERA adopts a position in the Greek **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 800 BC, but pantheon that is at times ambiguous. The
rela-probably originating from a prehistoric model, tionship with Zeus
is incestuous since she is also until Christianization (circa AD 400).

the eldest daughter of KRONOS and therefore **SYNONYMS** Heracles
(Roman).

Zeus's full sister. Mythology views her both as an **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none specific.

independent and wilful senior goddess, and as a **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and carvings; pillars tragi-comic figure. Her marriage
involves a degree of Herakles.

of subterfuge, persuading Zeus by means of a **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Herakles* (Euripedes); *Iliad* magic girdle momentarily to forget his
preoccupa-and *Odyssey* (Homer); *Catalogues* (Hesiod); tions with the
Trojan War. In another piece of leg-Dodekathlos (Peisandros); votive
inscriptions.

end Zeus turns himself into a cuckoo so that he may fly into Hera's
bosom. Who seduced whom Herakles probably originates out of a diffusion
of thus remains ambiguous. Curiously, neither in lit-heroic myths about
hunting spirits, as a *shaman* who erature nor in art is Hera perceived
as a mother protected the tribe against wild animals and who goddess.
She seems to have borne only a limited possessed the necessary
supernatural skills to ensure number of Zeus's named children. The most
a safe outcome to the chase. This foundation may prominent is ARES, yet
he is also the least favored then have drawn on role models such as
NINURTA, by the god. Other minor offspring included HEBE

found in ancient Near Eastern culture. Herakles is and EILEITHYIA. Hera
relates to Zeus in three a son of ZEUS and HERA and the consort of
distinct "phases"---consummation in which she is Deianeira (destroyer of
man). He is a heroic god of *pais* the girl; wedding and fulfillment as
*teleia*; and massive stature and prodigious appetite (see also
separation when she becomes *chera*.

THOR) who performs many feats of strength and

[]{#index_split_002.html#p137}122 **Hercules** courage, including the
liberation of PROMETHEUS.

guardianship of the deceased in the afterlife and He is a slayer of
lions and engages in combat with sometimes appearing as a figurine in
attendance mythical creatures comparable to those found on on ISIS in
building foundations.

Mesopotamian seals. He thus destroyed the seven-headed serpent and
hunted many others. He is frequently depicted wearing a lion skin. His
exploits **Hermaphroditos**

include the cleansing of the Augean stables so as to God(dess) of
uncertain status. Greek. The off-earn a tenth part of the cattle of the
sun, the catch-spring of HERMES and APHRODITE and the lover ing of the
Stymphalos birds, the temporary cap-of the water nymph Salmakis.
Tradition has it that ture of Cerberus, the hound of Hades, and the
their passion for one another was so great that picking of the golden
apples of immortality.

they merged into a single androgynous being.

Herakles became the god-ancestor of the Dorian kings. Alexander the
Great had an image of him incorporated into his coinage. According
**HERMES**

to one legend, Deianeira contrived Herakles's **ORIGIN** Greek.
Messenger of the gods.

death in a fit of jealous pique with a robe tainted **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 800 BC but with the poisoned blood of a centaur,
ironically probably earlier until Christianization (circa AD

from one of Herakles's own arrows, which 400).

inflicted such torture upon him that he commit-SYNONYMS none.

ted suicide by self-immolation on Mount Oita **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Pheneos (Arcadia); other-

(near Trachis). In a conflicting myth Herakles wise few specific places,
but strongly associated slew his wife and children at Thebes. Herakles
with wayside shrines and cairns.

enjoyed cult centers in many places, with the **ART REFERENCES**
probably certain prehistoric notable exception of Crete. There were
major phallic figures marking boundaries; Parthenon sanctuaries on
Thasos and on Mount Oita, where frieze; Hermes of Praxiteles in Olympia.

every four years the death of the god was marked **LITERARY**

**SOURCES** *Iliad, Odyssey* (Homer); by a sacrificial fire festival. A
similar rite is known *Theogony* (Hesiod).

from Tarsos in Cilicia for the god Sandon. The festivities were often
marked by huge feasts. In Hermes is the son of a nymph, MAIA, who
con-Roman culture he becomes HERCULES.

sorted with ZEUS. He was born in the Arcadian mountains, a complex,
Machiavellian character full of trickery and sexual vigor. His most
signif-Hercules

icant consort is APHRODITE. He is a god of God. Roman.

boundaries, guardian of graves and patron deity *See also* HERAKLES.

of shepherds. Perversely, he patronizes both heralds and thieves and is
a bringer of good fortune.

According to legend Hermes as a day-old infant **Heret-Kau**

stole the cattle of his elder brother APOLLO while Underworld goddess.
Egyptian (Lower). Very lit-playing a lyre. Legend accords to him the
inven-tle is known of Heret-Kau. She was recognized tion of fire, also
generated on his first day. Her-chiefly in the Old Kingdom (27th to 22nd
mes's skills at theft were put to use by the other centuries BC),
apparently concerned with gods of Olympus, who sent him to liberate ARES

[]{#index_split_002.html#p138}**HERYSˇAF** 123

from a barrel and to bring King Priam of Troy Great Park, Berkshire,
England, he equates into conciliatory meeting with the Greek war with
the Welsh deities GWYNN AP NUDD and hero Achilles after the death of
Hector.

ARAWN and is, according to legend, the leader Classical art depicts
Hermes wearing winged of the phantom hunt. Depicted with stag-like
golden sandals and holding a magical herald's staff antlers.

consisting of intertwined serpents, the *kerykeion*.

He is reputedly the only being able to find his way to the underworld
ferry of Charon and back **Heros**

again. Hence he was sent to bring both PERSE-Chthonic underworld god.
Thracian. Depicted PHONE and Eurydice back from Hades. In com-as a
horseman. His image regularly appears on pany with other Greek gods,
Hermes is endowed funerary stelae.

with not-inconsiderable sexual prowess which he directs toward
countryside nymphs and with which he also maintains a healthy and
thriving **Heruka**

population of sheep and goats! He was often rep-God. Buddhist
(Mahayana). One of the most pop-resented in wayside shrines in the form
of a phal-ular deities in the pantheon, though probably lic pillar or
post which was regarded as a funerary owing much to the influence of the
Hindu god monument, hence the role of grave guardian.

SˇIVA. Originally an epithet for another Hindu god, GANESA, but in
Buddhism seen as an emanation of AKSOBHYA. His SAKTI is NAIRAMATA and
**Hermod**

the product of their liaison is *nirvana* (eternal Messenger god. Nordic
(Icelandic). One of the bliss). Typically he stands upon a corpse. In
north-sons of the Viking god OTHIN, he was sent to eastern India, Heruka
is worshiped as a compas-Hel on a mission to obtain the release of the
god sionate god. Attributes: club, flayed human skin, BALDER, who had
been slain by the blind god image of Aksobhya, jewel, knife, fifty
skulls, Hod. The mission failed because only one crea-sword, staff and
teeth.

ture in the world, a hag (probably LOKI in disguise), failed to weep at
Balder's loss and Hermod returned empty-handed. It may be argued that
**HERYSˇAF** *(he who is upon his lake)* Hermod is less a deity than a
demigod hero mod-ORIGIN Egyptian. Primeval deity associated both eled on
the Danish king of the *Beowulf Saga.* Also with Osiris and Re.

Heremod; Hermoth.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from circa 2700 BC, and probably earlier,
until the end of Egyptian history (circa AD 400).

**Hermus**

**SYNONYMS** Arsaphes (Plutarch).

River god. Roman. A sanctuary has been identi-CENTER(S) OF CULT Hnes
(Ihnasya el-Medina) fied at Sardis.

near Beni Suef.

**ART REFERENCES** reliefs and sculptures including a gold figurine held
by the Boston Museum of **Herne**

Fine Arts.

Chthonic underworld god. Celtic (British) or **LITERARY SOURCES** stela
from Hnes later moved Anglo-Saxon. Known locally from Windsor to Pompeii
(Naples Museum).

[]{#index_split_002.html#p139}124 **Hesat**

Herysˇaf is a ram god said to have emerged from the she was wedded
faithfully to the sacred hearth primeval ocean, possibly recreated in
the form of a fire. By tradition maiden Greek daughters tended sacred
lake at Hnes, the capital of Lower Egypt for the household hearth.
Hestia was conventionally a time at the beginning of the third
millennium offered small gifts of food and drink.

(during the First Intermediate Period). The god is depicted with a human
torso and the head of a ram wearing the *atef* crown of Lower Egypt.

**Hetepes-Sekhus**

Herysˇaf began as a local deity but took on Chthonic underworld goddess.
Egyptian. A minor national importance as the soul ( *ba*) of RE, and of
deity accompanied by a retinue of crocodiles. As OSIRIS. Herysˇaf's
sanctuary was enlarged by one of the manifestations of the vengeful "eye
of Rameses II and the god is said to have protected RE," she destroys
the souls of the adversaries of the life of the last Egyptian pharaoh
when the the underworld ruler OSIRIS. Depicted as a cobra Persian and
later Macedonian dominations or anthropomorphically with a cobra's head.

began. He eventually became syncretized with HERAKLES in Greco-Roman
culture and Hnes became known as Herakleopolis.

**Hevajira**

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A BODHISATTVA ( *buddha*-designate) and an
emanation of AKSOB-Hesat

HYA. The Tantric form of HERUKA and the Bud-Goddess of birth. Egyptian.
Minor guardian of dhist equivalent of the Hindu god Sˇiva Nataraja.

pregnant and nursing mothers whose milk, the His SAKTI is NAIRAMATA or
VAJRAVARAHI and he

"beer of Hesat," nourishes humanity. Identified in may appear dominating
the four *MARAS* (the some texts as the mother of ANUBIS. Depicted as
Hindu gods BRAHMA, VISŇU, SˇIVA and INDRA).

a cow.

Color: blue. Attributes: bell, bow, hook, image of Aksobhya on crown,
jewel, lotus, prayer wheel, wine glass. He holds a skull in each hand
and an **HESTIA**

assortment of other weapons. Three- or eight-ORIGIN Greek. Goddess of
hearth and home.

headed, from two to sixteen arms and two or four **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 800 BC but legs; three-eyed.

probably earlier and through until Christianization (circa AD 400).
**SYNONYMS** Histie.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** local household shrines.

**Hexchuchan**

**ART REFERENCES** none.

God of war. Mayan (Itza, classical Mesoameri-LITERARY SOURCES *Hymn to
Aphrodite* (Homer); can) \[Mexico\]. One of several to whom the resin
*Phaedra* (Plato).

copal was burned before starting a battle. He may have been a tribal
ancestor.

Hestia is a minor goddess in the Greek pantheon, but one who enjoyed
importance in individual households. One of the daughters of KRONOS and
**Hi'aika**

RHEA, her adherence to the fireside prevented Goddess. Hawaiian. The
daughter of HAUMEA her from joining the procession of gods described and
younger sister of PELE, the volcano goddess, in Plato's *Phaedra*. On
oath she remained virginal Hi'aika is the mistress of the dance and
especially following the notion that fire is phallic and that of the
hula. Separate traditions identify her with

[]{#index_split_002.html#p140}**Hina** 125

LAKA, the god of the hula and the son of KANE, hall of great beauty,
used to entice the sun god-the god of light; and with a goddess, Na
Wahine, dess Amaterasu from her cave. Linked with the the daughter of
the primordial creator principle god TAOKI-HO-OI-NO-KAMI.

KEAWE. The hula was designed to give a formal-ized structure to the
enactment of myths and among the favorite topics is the romance between
**Hilal**

Pele and the hero Lohiau. According to mythol-Moon god. Pre-Islamic
Arabian. Specifically the ogy Hi'aika was entrusted with a mission to
find deity of the new moon.

Lohiau on Pele's behalf and to bring him back to her, a mission that
subsequently enflamed the jealousy of Pele over her sister's developing
rela-Hi'lina

tionship with Lohiau, and brought about his Tribal god. Haida Indian
\[Queen Charlotte death in Pele's fiery lava.

Island, Canada\]. The personification of the thunderbird known to many
Indian tribes. The noise of the thunder is caused by the beating of its
**Hi-Hiya-Hi**

wings, and when it opens its eyes there is light-Sun god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of a number of ning. The thunder clouds are its cloak.

minor sun deities, engendered from the blood of the god KAGU-TSUCHI and
worshiped in the mountain sanctuary of the fire KAMIS, Kono-Jinja.

**Himavan** *(snowy)*

In Japan certain older people still worship the Mountain god. Hindu. The
personification of sun. They go outside at sunrise, face east and bow,
the Himalaya and considered to be the father of clapping their hands.

PARVATI and GANGA. His consort is MENA. Also Himavat.

*See also* HIMAVAN.

**Hiisi**

Tree god. Pre-Christian Karelian \[Finland\]. Said to reside in pine
forests. After Christianization **Himerus**

he was degraded to a troll.

God of desire. Greco-Roman. Member of the Olympian pantheon and
attendant on APHRODITE

(VENUS).

**Hikoboshi**

Astral god. Shinto \[Japan\]. The consort of the star goddess
AME-NO-TANABATA-HINE-NO-Hina

MIKOTO. The two are, according to mythology, Moon goddess. Polynesian
\[Tahiti\]. In local deeply in love. Their festival was merged with
traditions the daughter of the god TANGAROA and the Tibetan Bon festival
of the dead, the *Ullum-creatrix of the moon, which she governs. She
lives *bana*. Also Kengyu-Sei.*

in one of its dark spots representing groves of trees which she brought
from earth in a canoe and planted. She is also represented as the
consort of **Hiko-Sashiri-No-Kami**

Tangaroa. Hina probably evolved in Tahiti from God of carpenters. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of several the Polynesian underworld goddess
HINE-NUI-minor deities involved in the building of a sacred TE-PO. Also
SINA (Samoa); Ina (Hervey Islands).

[]{#index_split_002.html#p141}126 **Hina-Uri** **Hina-Uri**

**Hinglaj(-Mata)**

Moon goddess. Polynesian. Also known as Mother goddess. Hindu. Locally
worshiped in HINA, Ina or SINA, she is the sister of MAUI and northern
India and particularly in Baluchistan.

the consort of Irewaru. Tradition has it that she can manifest herself
in two forms according to the lunar phases. Her role is associated with
fer-Hinkon

tility and her cult may have been imported from Hunting god. Tungus
(Siberian). Revered as the Asia, since SIN is the name of a western
Asiatic lord of all animals and controller of the chase.

moon god also closely associated with fertility rites.

**Hi-No-Kagu-Tsuchi**

Fire god. Shinto \[Japan\]. The deity whose birth **Hine-Ahu-One**

*(maiden formed of the*

caused the death by burning of the primordial *earth)*

goddess IZANAMI after which the eight thunders Chthonic goddess.
Polynesian (including Maori).

sprang from her corpse.

Engendered by the god TANE when he needed a consort because, with the
exception of the primordial earth mother PAPATUANUKU, all the
exist-Hiranyagarbha *(golden egg)* ing gods of creation were male. Tane
created her Creator god. Hindu (Vedic). Identified in the out of the red
earth and breathed life into her. She opening of the *Rg Veda,* as the
god of the golden became the mother of HINE-ATA-UIRA.

seed emerging from the cosmic egg. The halves of the shell become sky
and earth, and the yolk becomes the sun. The embryo impregnates the
**Hine-Ata-Uira**

*(daughter of the sparkling*

primordial waters.

*dawn)*

Goddess of light. Polynesian (including Maori).

The daughter of the creator god TANE and HINE-Hiruko

AHU-ONE. She did not remain a sky goddess but Minor sun god. Shinto
(Japan). Identified as hav-descended into the underworld, where she ing
been engendered after the sun and moon.

became the personification of death, HINE-NUI-Probably eclipsed by
AMATERASU.

TE-PO.

**Hittavainen**

**Hine-Nui-Te-Po** *(great woman of the* Hunting god. Pre-Christian
Karelian (Finnish).

*night)*

Guardian deity of hare-hunters.

Chthonic underworld goddess. Polynesian (including Maori). Originally
she was HINE-ATA-UIRA, the daughter of TANE and HINE-AHU-Hlothyn

ONE, but she descended to rule over the Goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). A
less common underworld. She is depicted in human form but name for the
goddess Fjorgynn, noted in the with eyes of jade, hair of seaweed and
teeth like *Trymskvoia* from the *Poetic Edda.* The mother of those of a
predatory fish.

THOR.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p142}**Horagalles** 127

**HODER**

**Ho-Musubi-No-Kami**

**ORIGIN** Nordic (Icelandic). The blind god.

Fire god. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of a number of fire **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** Viking period (circa KAMIS who are honored in special
*Hi-Matsuri* fes-AD 700) and earlier through to Christianization tivals.
The sacred fire can only be generated by a (circa AD 1100).

board and stick and is regarded as a powerful **SYNONYMS** Hod, Hodur.

purifier in Shintoism. The most celebrated tem-CENTER(S) OF CULT none
known.

ple of the fire *kamis* is on Mount Atago near **ART REFERENCES** none
known, but probably the Kyoto; worshipers are drawn to it from all over
subject of anonymous carvings.

Japan to obtain charms as protection against fire.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose* *Edda* (Snorri);
*Historia Danica* (Saxo); runic inscriptions.

**Ho-No-Kagu-Tsuchi-No-Kami**

Fire god. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of a number of fire Hoder is one of the
less well-defined of the Norse KAMIS who are honored in special
*Hi-Matsuri* fes-AESIR gods whose chief claim to notoriety lies in
tivals. The sacred fire can only be generated by a that he is
responsible, in two separate narratives board and stick and is regarded
as a powerful puri-

(Snorri's and Saxo's), for the death of the god fier in Shintoism. The
most celebrated temple of BALDER. In Snorri's Icelandic version Hoder is
per-the fire *kamis* is on Mount Atago near Kyoto to suaded by LOKI to
hurl a piece of mistletoe at Balder which worshipers are drawn from all
over Japan to (the only thing from which he is not protected): it obtain
charms as protection against fire.

turns into a lethal spear. According to Snorri, Hoder may even represent
an agent of HEL. Saxo's Danish account has Hoder and Balder contesting
the hand **Honus**

of the goddess N

God of military honors. Roman. Depicted as a ANNA. She eventually weds
Hoder, who then slays Balder with a magic sword. Hoder youthful warrior
carrying a lance and cornucopia.

himself is slain by his arch-enemy, the god VALI.

**Ho-Po**

**Hoenir**

River god. Taoist (Chinese). The so-called God. Nordic (Icelandic)
Identified in the *Voluspa*

"Count of the River," the deity who controls all ( *Poetic Edda*) as the
priest of the Viking gods who rivers but particularly the Yellow River,
and who handles the "blood wands" i.e. divines future is the subject of
an official cult and sacrifice.

events. Some authors believe Hoenir to be a According to tradition he
achieved immortality hypostasis of the god OTHIN, particularly con-by
weighing himself down with stones and cerned with giving the human race
senses and drowning himself. He received an annual sacrifice feelings.
Also known in north Germanic culture.

of a young girl until the end of the Shou Dynasty He is said to have
fled to Vanaheim after the great circa 250 BC. Also Hebo; Ping-Yi.

battle between the AESIR and VANIR gods.

**Horagalles**

**Hokushin-O-Kami**

Weather god. Lappish. The local embodiment of Astral deity. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The apotheosis of the Nordic (Icelandic) god THOR. Depicted
as a the "little bear," Ursa Minor.

bearded figure carrying a pair of hammers.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p143}128 **Horkos**

**Horkos**

human eye embellished with a typical Egyptian God of oaths. Greek. The
son of ERIS (strife).

cosmetic extension and subtended by the mark-ings of a falcon's cheek.
As Horus the child, he is typically drawn naked and with fingers in
mouth.

**HORUS**

*\[Greek\] (the high one)*

Horus is a form of the sun god. The alternative **ORIGIN** Egyptian. Sky
god.

name Harakhti translates "Horus of the horizon"

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC until and he is sometimes
depicted as a sun disc mounted end of Egyptian history (circa AD 400).

between falcon's wings. He is also the symbol of **SYNONYMS** Har
(Egyptian); HAROERIS; Har-pa-the god kings of Egypt. In early dynastic
times the khered or Harpokrates (Greek); HARSIESE. Also ruler was a
"follower of Horus" but by 3000 BC he Har-nedj-itef or Harendotes
(Greek); Har-mau *became* Horus in life and Osiris in death.

or HARSOMTUS (Greek); HARAKHTI; Har-em-As Harpokrates, Horus is depicted
naked and akhet or HARMACHIS (Greek).

being suckled on Isis's knee and he often appears **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
universal throughout areas on amulets extending protection against
lions, of Egyptian influence but particularly Mesen crocodiles, snakes
and other dangerous animals.

\[Edfu\] in Upper Egypt; Behdet in the delta; As the adult son of Isis,
Haroeris, he performed Nekhen or Hierakonpolis (Greek) \[Kom el-the
"opening of the mouth" ceremony on his dead Ahmar\]; Khem or Letopolis
(Greek) \[Ausim\]; father, Osiris, and avenged his death, regaining also
at Buhen close to the second Nile cataract; the throne of Egypt from
Seth. Horus can also be Aniba in lower Nubia.

the son of Horus the elder and HATHOR.

**ART**

**REFERENCES** pre-dynastic monuments; The "eye of Horus" arises from
the legendary sculptures throughout Egyptian period.

incident in which Seth tore out Horus's eye, **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts; coffin texts, which was later restored by his mother. The
sym-etc.

bol can represent security of kingship, perfection and protection
against the evil influence of Seth.

Horus is one of the most universally important gods in the Egyptian
pantheon attested from the earliest recorded period. By tradition born
at **Hotei**

Khemmis in the Nile delta region, Horus's father God of luck. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of seven gods of was the dead OSIRIS, his mother was
ISIS, but a fortune known in Shintoism. He is depicted with complex
genealogy recognized him distinctly as a large belly and dressed in the
robes of a Bud-Horus, Horus the child (HARPOKRATES) and dhist priest.
Attributes include a fan and a large Horus the elder. In legend he was
the first ruler sack on his shoulder which "never stops to give, of all
Egypt after an eighty-year struggle for despite continuous demand."

supremacy with his brother and rival SETH.

Horus's symbol is the falcon and he is generally depicted either wholly
as a hawk or in human **Hotr(a)** *(invoker)*

form with a falcon's head. In some places the tra-Minor goddess of
sacrifices. Hindu (Vedic). She dition by which his mother hid him in the
papyrus is invoked to appear on the sacrificial field before marshes of
the delta is recognized by depicting a a ritual and is particularly
identified with the act falcon standing atop a column of papyrus reeds.

of prayer. Usually associated with the goddess He is also recognized as
the "eye of Horus"---a SARASVATI.

[]{#index_split_002.html#p144}**Huang Ti** 129

**Hours**

also identified in some texts as the golden mother Underworld goddesses.
Egyptian. The twelve of the tortoise, the animal which embodies the
daughters of the sun god RE. They act in concert universe but which is
also the dark warrior sym-against the adversaries of Re and control the
des-bolizing winter and death. Her sacred animal is tiny of human beings
in terms of each person's life the crane, which is the Chinese symbol of
span, reflecting the supremacy of order and time longevity (it is often
incorporated into funeral rit-over chaos. The Hours are sometimes
repre-uals). She is also said to be represented by the sented on the
walls of royal tombs in anthropo-mythical phoenix.

morphic form with a five-pointed star above the head. Also Horae
(Greek).

**Hu**

God personifying royal authority. Egyptian. One **Hrsikesa** *(lord of
the senses)* of several minor deities born from drops of blood God.
Hindu. Minor avatara of VISŇU. His SAKTI emitting from the penis of the
sun god RE (see is HARSA.

also SIA). Hu epitomizes the power and command of the ruler.

**HSI WANG MU**

*(queen of the western*

*heaven)*

**Huaca**

**ORIGIN** Taoist (Chinese). Goddess of longevity.

Spirit being. Inca (pre-Columbian South Amer-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
from prehistoric times until present.

ica) \[Peru, etc\]. The apotheosis of a natural object such as a rock or
a place of local impor-SYNONYMS Xi Wang Mu.

tance such as a spring. It is uncertain whether the **CENTER(S) OF
CULT** throughout Chinese culture.

principle is one of animism (when a deity takes **ART REFERENCES**
paintings and sculptures.

on different natural shapes at will) or anímatism **LITERARY SOURCES**
various philosophical and religious texts, mostly inadequately
researched (when an object is a supernatural being in its and
untranslated.

own right).

One of the oldest deities known in China, she may have originated as a
plague goddess depicted with **Huanacauri**

feline fangs and tail. Under Taoism she became Guardian spirit. Inca
(pre-Columbian South more benign in nature, identified as both governing
America) \[Peru, etc\]. The apotheosis of a special the length of mortal
life and granting the boon of spindle-shaped stone sited near Cuzco
which pro-longevity and, in some instances, immortality. Her tected the
Inca royal family and also featured home is in the western Chinese K'un
Lun moun-strongly in the maturation rites of male Inca ado-tains or,
alternatively, in the Hindukush, where she lescents. Also Wanakawri.

is accompanied by five jade ladies. According to tradition she visited
the earth on two occasions, once in 985 BC to the emperor Mu, and again
in the **Huang Ti**

second century BC to the emperor Wu Ti.

Astral god. Chinese. Allegedly a deified emperor, She is the ruler of
the west and is associated the so-called "yellow emperor," who rules the
with the autumn, the season of old age. She is *moving* as distinct from
*dark* heavens, the latter

[]{#index_split_002.html#p145}130 **Hubal**

being presided over by the god PAK TAI. He is **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 750, but attributed with giving mankind the wheel.

probably much earlier, to circa AD 1500.

**SYNONYMS** Blue Tezcatlipoca.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Tenochtitlan \[Mexico City\].

**Hubal**

**ART REFERENCES** stone sculptures, murals, codex Local tutelary and
oracular god. Pre-Islamic illustrations.

Arabian. An anthropomorphic figure of the deity **LITERARY SOURCES**
pre-Columbian codices.

in red carnelian still stands in the holy city of Mecca.

The tutelary god of the Aztecs who also regarded him as a war god. He is
the southern (blue) aspect or emanation of the sun god TEZCATLIPOCA, the
**Huban**

so-called high-flying sun, and the head of the Tutelary god. Elamite
\[Iran\]. Equating with the group classed as the Huitzilpochtli complex.
He Sumerian ENLIL.

is regarded, in alternative tradition, as one of the four sons of
Tezcatlipoca. His mother is the decapitated earth goddess COATLICUE,
from **Huehuecoyotl** *(old coyote)* whose womb he sprang fully armed.
He slaugh-Minor god of sexual lust. Aztec (classical tered his sister
(moon) and his 400 brothers Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group
(stars) in revenge for the death of his mother, classed as the
XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

signifying the triumph of sunlight over darkness.

By tradition he led the people from their ancestral home in Aztlan
(perhaps in the state of **Huehuecoyotl-Coyotlinahual**

*(coyote his*

Nayarit) with the promise of securing a great *disguise)*

empire. He appeared to them in the form of an Minor god of feather
workers. Aztec (classical eagle clutching a serpent in its talons and
stand-Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group ing atop a cactus
growing on a rocky island. This classed as the XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

was Tenochtitlan, on the site of which Mexico City now stands.

The Great Temple of Coatepec was dedicated **Huehuetotl** *(old god)* to
the cosmic battle. In ritual Huitzilopochti was God of fire. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-fed on human hearts taken from captives,
the ico\]. Associated with paternalism and one of the blood of which was
said to cool his heat; several group classed as the XIUHTECUHTLI
complex.

wars were instigated to gain sacrificial material.

`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_003.html}

For the origin of the name "blue hummingbird on left foot," see
TEZCATLIPOCA.

**Huiracocha** See VAIRACOCHA.

**Huixtocihuatl**

*(lady of Huixtorin)*

**HUITZILPOCHTLI** *(blue hummingbird* Goddess of salt-makers. Aztec
(classical *on left foot)*

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group **ORIGIN** Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

classed as the TLALOC complex, generally Sun god, patron god of the
Aztec nation.

involved with rain, agriculture and fertility.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p146}**Hyakinthos** 131

**Hun Hunapu**

heavens. The god is propitiated with cakes made Creator god. Mayan
(Yucatec and Quiche, classi-from the first grain of the year, on the
fifth day of cal Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The father of the fifth month
and in some traditions he is seen HUNAPU and Ix Balan Ku. According to
the sacred as an aspect of the sea dragon king.

Mayan text *Popol Vuh*, he was decapitated during a football game and
his head became lodged in the calabash tree which bore fruit from that
day.

**Hunhau**

God of death. Mayan (Yucatec and Quiche, classical Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. One of the sev-Hunab Ku

eral "lords of death" listed in the codices who rule Creator god. Mayan
(Yucatec, classical Meso-the underworld, Mictlan. Hunhau is generally
american) \[Mexico\]. The greatest deity in the depicted with canine
attributes, or with the head pantheon, no image is created of Hunab Ku
since of an owl.

he is considered to be without form. His son is the *See also* YUM
CIMIL. Also God A.

iguana god, ITZAM NA, and he may have become the Mayan counterpart of
the Christian god.

**Hurabtil**

God of uncertain status. Elamite \[Iran\]. Known **Hunapu**

only from passing mention in Akkadian texts. Also Creator god. Mayan
(Yucatec and Quiche, classi-Lahurabtil.

cal Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. According to the sacred text *Popol Vuh,*
the son of HUN HUNAPU

and the twin brother of Ix Balan Ku. Tradition has **Huracan**

it that, like his father, he was decapitated in a his-Creator god. Mayan
(Quiche, classical toric struggle with the underworld gods and
sub-Mesoamerican) \[Guatemalan highlands\]. Having sequently became the
sun god, while his sibling is created the world, he fashioned the first
humans the apotheosis of the moon.

from pieces of maize dough. The counterpart of the Yucatec HUNAB KU.

**Hunaunic**

See CHAOB.

**Huvi**

God of hunting. Ovimbundu \[central Angola, **Hung Sheng** *(holy one)*
West Africa\]. All meat is kept in front of his Guardian god. Chinese. A
deity who protects shrines, which are decorated with poles capped by
fishing boats and their crews against danger at skulls. He is
propitiated by dance and offerings, sea in the Southern Ocean. His role
is similar to presided over by a priesthood.

that of the goddess KUAN YIN. Little is known of the origin of Hung
Sheng, but he was allegedly a mortal who died on the thirteenth day of
the sec-Hyakinthos

ond moon, which falls two days before the spring God of vegetation.
Greek. An ancient pre-Home-equinox when the sea dragon king, Lung Wang,
ric deity known particularly from Amyklai (pre-is believed to leave the
ocean and ascend into the Dorian seat of kingship at Sparta). He is
beloved by

[]{#index_split_003.html#p147}132 **Hygieia** APOLLO who perversely
kills him with a discus and **Hyperion**

changes him into a flower. At Amyklai the bronze God of primordial
light. Greek. A pre-Homeric of Apollo stands upon an altar-like pedestal
said to deity, one of the race of TITANS whose consort is, be the grave
of Hyakinthos and, prior to sacrifice according to some texts, THEA and
who is the being made to Apollo, offerings to Hyakinthos father of
HELIOS and SELENE.

were passed through a bronze door in the pedestal.

**Hypnos**

**Hygieia**

God of sleep. Greek. One of the sons of the god-Goddess of health.
Greek. The daughter of dess of the night NYX and the brother of
ASKLEPIOS, the physician god of healing. *Hygieia* THANATOS.

was also a remedial drink made from wheat, oil and honey. She is
depicted as Hygieia-Salus in a marble group sculpture in the Vatican,
with **Hypsistos**

Asclepius (the Roman god of healing) and the Local tutelary god.
Greco-Roman. Known from snake, which she is touching.

the region of the Bosphorus circa 150 BC until AD

250\. As late as the fourth century AD there are mentions in texts of
*hypsistarii* in Cappadocia, who **Hymenaios**

seem to have been unorthodox, Greek-speaking, God of marriage.
Greco-Roman. Member of the Jewish fringe sectarians. The word
*hypsistos* occurs Olympian pantheon and attendant on APHRODITE

in the Septuagint version of the *Vetus Testamentum* (VENUS). Depicted
with wings and carrying a and means "almighty."

torch, and invoked at the wedding ceremony.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p148}I6

**Ialonus**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa God of meadows.
Romano-Celtic (British and AD 700) and earlier until Christianization
(circa Continental European). Known from inscriptions AD 1100).

at Lancaster (Ialonus Contrebis) and Nimes.

**SYNONYMS** Idun (German); Iduna.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none known.

**ART REFERENCES** none known, though possibly **Iapetos**

the subject of anonymous carvings.

God. Greek. One of the sons of OURANOS

**LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* (heaven) and a
member of the TITAN race which (Snorri).

clashed with the Olympian gods. He is the father of the heroes Atlas and
PROMETHEUS.

Little is recorded in mythology. Idunn is the consort of BRAGI, the poet
god, and she guards the **Icauna**

golden apples of eternal youth for the gods of River goddess.
Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Guardian Asgard. She was abducted by LOKI and
handed deity of the river Yonne \[Brittany\].

over to the giant Thiassi as payment for the building of Valhalla. When
the gods began to age, Loki assisted in recovering Idunn with her vital
fruit.

**Icci**

She reflects a northern version of the ancient Animistic spirits.
Siberian.

`</i>`{=html}

*symbolism of a deity who guards the life-sustain-See also* URUN AJY
TOYON.

ing fruit of heaven.

**Iccovellauna**

**Ifa**

Water goddess. Celtic (Continental European).

God of wisdom. Yoruba \[western Nigeria, West Known only from
inscriptions.

Africa\]. An oracular deity who, according to tradition, lives in a
sanctuary in the holy city of Ile **IDUNN**

Ife but who is called on by the tutelary god, **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic) and possibly Ger-OLDUMARE, for advice. He is the father of
eight manic. Keeper of the apples of immortality.

children, all of whom became paramount chiefs.

133

[]{#index_split_003.html#p149}134 **Ifru**

At one time he is said to have left the earth where-of turkeys and
chickens at sowing time. Ih Fen upon famine and plague descended. His
wisdom may be represented sowing maize seed.

is gained through the implements of divination, namely palm nuts.

**Ihoiho**

Creator god. Polynesian \[Society Islands\]. Before **Ifru**

Ihoiho there was nothing. He created the God. Roman-North African. A
rare example in primeval waters on which floated TINO TAATA, this region
of a named deity. Known from an the creator of mankind.

inscription at Cirta \[Constantine, Algeria\].

**Ihy**

**Igalilik**

God of music. Egyptian (Upper). Minor deity Hunting spirit. Inuit
\[North American\]. He trav-personifying the jubilant noise of the
cultic els the icy wastes with a kitchen strapped to his sistrum rattle
generally associated with the back which includes a pot big enough to
carry a goddess Hathor. The son of HATHOR and whole seal. It boils as he
carries it.

HORUS. Particularly known from the Hathor sanctuary at Dendara. Depicted
anthropomorphically as a nude child with a side-lock of hair **Igigi**

and with finger in mouth. May carry a sistrum Collective name of a class
of gods. Mesopotamian and necklace.

(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). The group of younger sky gods in the
pantheon headed by ENLIL (ELLIL). They are often described in the **Ikal
Ahau**

texts in conjunction with the ANUNNAKI.

Chthonic god of death. Mayan (Tzotzil, classical Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. Perceived as a diminutive figure who lives in a cave by day
but wanders **Ignerssuak** *(great fire)* at night attacking people and
eating raw human Sea god. Inuit \[North American\]. One of a flesh. He
is also considered to inhabit Christian group of generally benevolent
deities. Numbers church towers in Mexico and is probably person-of
Ignerssuak are thought to surround mariners ified by vampire bats.

and the entrance to their home is on the sea shore.

**Ikatere**

Fish god. Polynesian. The son of Punga and **Ih P'en**

grandson of TANGAROA, the sea and creator god, Chthonic fertility god.
Mayan (classical he is revered in various regions of Polynesia as
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The deity concerned the progenitor of all life
in the sea, especially with the growth of plants, and consort of the
bean fish. His brother is Tu-Te-Wanawana, the deity goddess IX KANAN. He
is also god of family life, responsible for the well-being of lizards,
snakes property and other wealth. The couple are and other reptiles.
When fierce storms arose invoked as a single personality with the
sacrifice at the time of creation under the control of

[]{#index_split_003.html#p150}**I'lena** 135

TAWHIRIMATEA, the god of winds, mythology Il is the model on which the
northern Israelite records that Tu-Te-Wanawana went inland to god, El,
may have been based. The supreme escape the devastation while Ikatere
took to the authority, morally and creatively, overseeing the safety of
the sea. The incident became known as assembly of gods. The god to whom
BAAL is ulti-the schism of Tawhirimatea and has resulted in an mately
answerable. According to legend he lives eternal conflict between
TANE(MAHUTA) the for-in royal surroundings in a remote place lying at
est god and Tangaroa, the sea god.

the confluence of two rivers. A stele found at Ras Sˇamra has a seated
god with bull horns which may depict Il or Baal.

**Ikenga** *(right forearm)* God of fortune. Ibo \[Nigeria, West
Africa\]. A benevolent deity who guides the hands of **Ila**

mankind. He is depicted wearing a horned head-Minor god(dess) of
sacrifices. Hindu (Vedic). She dress, and carrying a sword and a severed
head.

is invoked to appear on the sacrificial field before He is invoked as a
household guardian.

a ritual. Usually associated with the goddess SARASVATI, Ila is linked
with the sacred cow and her epithets include "butter-handed" and
"butter-footed."

**Iksvaku**

Creator god. Hindu (Vedic). One of the ancestral dynasty of sun gods or
ADITI.

**Ilaalge**

Local god. Western Semitic (Nabataean). Worshiped at Al-Ge \[el-Gi in
Wadi Musa, in the Ara-Iku-Ikasuchi-No-Kami

bian desert\].

God of thunder. Shinto \[Japan\]. The most significant of the eight
thunder deities which emerged from the corpse of IZANAMI after she was
burned **Ilabrat**

to death.

Minor god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). The attendant and
minister of state of the chief sky god ANU.

**IL**

**ORIGIN** Canaanite \[northern Israel, Lebanon and Syrian coastal
regions\]. Creator god.

**Ilat**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 2000 BC, and Rain god. Pokot and Suk
\[Uganda and western probably earlier, until circa 200 BC or later.

Kenya, East Africa\]. The son of the creator god **SYNONYMS** EL
(Hebrew); LATIPAN; Tor-'Il.

TORORUT. According to legend, when his father **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Ugarit (Ras Sˇamra), but also calls on him to fetch water Ilat always
spills some, generally throughout areas of Canaanite influ-which
descends to earth as rain.

ence.

**ART REFERENCES** possibly a limited number of seals and stone reliefs.

**I'lena** *(rain woman)*

**LITERARY SOURCES** Ugaritic texts from Ras Animistic spirit. Koryak
\[Siberia\]. The consort of Sˇamra.

the creator spirit "universe" or TENANTO'MWAN.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p151}136 **Ilmarinen** **Ilmarinen**

**Immat**

Sky god. Pre-Christian Finnish. A weather god Demonic god. Kafir
\[Afghanistan\]. A deity to who places the stars in the sky. Also a
guardian whom sacrifices were addressed in the Ashkun deity of travelers
and a smith-god who educated villages of southwestern Kafiristan. Legend
has it man in the use of iron and forging.

that Immat carries off twenty virgin daughters every year. A festival
includes blood sacrifice and dances by twenty carefully selected young
priest-Ilyapa

esses.

Weather god. Inca (pre-Columbian South America) \[Peru, etc\]. Also
perceived as a thunder god, he became syncretized with Santiago, the
patron saint **Imporcitor**

of Spain. The Indians called Spanish firearms Minor god of agriculture.
Roman. The deity con-Ilyapa. Also Inti-Ilyapa; Coqi-Ilya; Illapa;
Katoylla.

cerned with harrowing the fields.

**lm**

**IMRA**

Storm god. Mesopotamian. The cuneiform gen-ORIGIN Kafir
\[Afghanistan---southern Hin-erally taken to refer to a storm god and
therefore dukush\]. Creator god.

probably meaning either ISˇKUR (Sumerian) or **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
unknown origins ADAD (Akkadian).

and continuing locally today.

**SYNONYMS** MARA (Prasun region).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** chiefly at Kushteki.

**Imana**

**ART REFERENCES** large wooden sculptures.

Creator god. Burundi \[East Africa\]. He engen-LITERARY SOURCES
Robertson G.S. *The Kafirs of* dered the first man, Kihanga, who
descended *the Hindukush* ( *1896*) *;* Morgenstierne G. *Some* from
heaven on a rope. Symbolized by a lamb or *Kati Myths and Hymns* (
*1951*) *.*

a young ram, he is also thought to speak through the roar of the bull.

Supreme Kafir creator god who generated all other deities by churning
his breath to life inside a golden goatskin. Other legendary sources
have **Imiut**

him taking his paramount position through guile Minor chthonic god.
Egyptian. One of the atten-from among an existing pantheon and possibly
dant deities of the necropolis, he is linked with superseding an earlier
creator god, MUNJEM

ANUBIS, and in pre-dynastic times was repre-MALIK. His mother was said
to be a giantess with sented by a skin hung on a pole.

four tusks. Imra is a sky god who lives among cloud and mist and who is
responsible, at least in part, for cosmic creation. He positioned the
sun **Immap Ukua**

and moon in the heavens. He is the ancestor of all Sea goddess. Inuit
\[eastern Greenland\]. The Prasun tribal chiefs. His sacred animal is
the ram mother of all sea creatures and invoked by fisher-which was
sacrificed regularly, as was the cow and, men and seal-hunters.

less frequently, the horse. Figures of the god are *See also* SEDNA.

crudely anthropomorphic. The main sanctuary

[]{#index_split_003.html#p152}**INANA** 137

to Imra, at a small town called Kushteki, was Her attendant is the minor
goddess NINSˇUBUR, destroyed in the early 1900s, but was an imposing and
her champion is the mythical hero Gilgamesˇ.

and ornately carved wooden structure. Other Of her many consorts, the
most significant is the smaller shrines survive, scattered throughout
the vegetation god DUMUZI. She becomes the hand-region.

maiden of An, the god of heaven. She is also iden-Imra is generally
perceived as a beneficent tified as the younger sister of the underworld
teacher who has endowed mankind with various goddess ERESˇKIGAL. She is
the tutelary deity of gifts including cattle, dogs, wheat, the wheel and
the southern Mesopotamian city of Unug (Uruk), the element iron. He also
has a destructive side to where her sanctuary is the Eanna temple.

his nature, causing floods and other havoc.

Inana is usually depicted wearing a horned headdress and tiered skirt,
with wings and with weapon cases at her shoulders. Her earliest
sym-Ina'hitelan

bol is a bundle of reeds tied in three places and Guardian spirit.
Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

with streamers. Later, in the Sargonic period, her The father of cloud
man YA'HALAN, he is per-symbol changes to a star or a rose. She may be
ceived as a supervisor of the skies and reindeer are associated with a
lion or lion cub and is often sacrificed to him.

depicted standing atop a mountain. She may be embodied in the sacred
tree of Mesopotamia, which evolved into a stylized totem made of wood
**INANA** *(queen of heaven)* and decorated with precious stones and
bands of **ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian) \[Iraq\]. God-metal.

dess of fertility and war.

Originally Inana may have been goddess of the **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC to date palm, as Dumuzi was god of the date
harvest.

1750 BC.

Her role then extended to wool, meat and grain **SYNONYMS** Inninna;
ISŤAR \[Akkadian\]; Nin-me-and ultimately to the whole of the natural
world.

sar-ra (lady of a myriad offices) She was also perceived as a rain
goddess and as the **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Unug \[Warka\]; also Erbil
goddess of the morning and evening stars. She and Nineveh.

was worshiped at dawn with offerings, and in the **ART REFERENCES**
plaques, reliefs, votive stelae, evening she became the patroness of
temple pros-glyptics, etc.

titutes when the evening star was seen as a harlot **LITERARY SOURCES**
cuneiform texts, particularly soliciting in the night skies. In less
commonly the *Gilgamesˇ* Epic and *Inana's Descent and the* encountered
roles she is goddess of lighting and *Death of Dumuzi;* temple hymns,
etc.

extinguishing fires, of tears and rejoicing, of enmity and fair dealing
and many other, usually The paramount goddess of the Sumerian
pan-conflicting, principles.

theon. Though not technically a "mother god-According to legend, ENKI,
who lives in the dess," she constitutes the first in a long line of
watery abyss or Abzu beneath the city of Eridu, historically recorded
female deities concerned was persuaded while drunk, and through Inana's
with the fertility of the natural world. Inana is subterfuge, to endow
her with more than a hun-also a warrior goddess. She is the daughter of
the dred divine decrees, which she took back to Unug moon god NANNA and
sister of UTU and ISˇKUR.

in her reed boat and which formed the basis of the In alternative
tradition, she is the daughter of AN.

Sumerian cultural constitution.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p153}138 **Inara**

Inana is one of three deities involved in the pri-Tama, in the shape of
a pear surrounded by small mordial battle between good and evil, the
latter flames. Often identified with the food goddess personified by the
dragon Kur. She is further TOYO-UKE-BIME.

engaged in a yearly conflict, also involving her consort Dumuzi, with
Eresˇkigal. She descends to the underworld to challenge Eresˇkigal and
finds **Inazuma**

herself stripped naked and tried before the seven Goddess of lightning.
Shinto \[Japan\]. The so-underworld judges, the ANUNNAKI. She is
sen-called consort of the rice. In certain regions when tenced and left
for dead for three days and nights lightning hits a rice field bamboos
are erected before being restored at the behest of Enki, the around the
spot to signify that it has been sancti-god of wisdom, who creates two
beings, Kur-gar-fied by the fire of heaven. Also Ina-Bikari (light of ra
and Gala-tur-ra, to secure her release and to rice) and Ina-Tsurubi
(fertility of rice).

revive her by sprinkling her with the food and water of life.

**Indr**

Tutelary and weather god. Kafir \[Afghanistan\].

**Inara**

The brother of GISH and father of DISANI and Minor goddess. Hittite and
Hurrian. Daughter of Pano. Probably derived from the more widely the
weather god TESˇUB. In the legendary battle recognized Aryan god INDRA,
Indr is known with the dragon Illuyankas she assists her father to
chiefly from the Waigal and Prasun areas of the triumph over evil.

southern Hindukush. It is generally assumed that he was ousted from
major importance by the god IMRA. Indr is also a god of wine who owns
sub-Inari *(rice-grower)*

stantial vineyards and is associated in south God(dess) of foodstuffs.
Shinto \[Japan\]. The pop-Nuristan with wine rituals (the annals of
Alexan-ular name of a god(dess) worshiped under the der the Great
suggest that he met with wine-generic title Miketsu-No-Kami in the
Shi-Den drinking "worshipers of DIONYSOS" in the sanctuary of the
imperial palace, but rarely else-Hindukush).

where. The deity displays gender changes, devel-In the Ashkun region of
southwestern Kafiris-ops many personalities and is revered extensively
tan, a famous vineyard near the village of Wamais in Japan. Inari is
often depicted as a bearded man is sacred to Indr. Also Inder.

riding a white fox but, in pictures sold at temple offices, (s)he is
generally shown as a woman with long flowing hair, carrying sheafs of
rice and **INDRA** *(possibly meaning "mighty")* sometimes, again,
riding the white fox. Inari sanc-ORIGIN Hindu \[India\]. Weather god.

tuaries are painted bright red, unlike most other **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1500 BC and Shinto temples. They are further
characterized by possibly earlier until present day.

rows of wooden portals which form tunnels lead-SYNONYMS none.

ing to the sanctuary. Sculptures of foxes are pro-CENTER(S) OF CULT
none.

lific (an animal endowed, in Japanese tradition, **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures in metal and stone; with supernatural powers) and the shrines
are reliefs.

decorated with a special device, the Hoju-No-LITERARY SOURCES *Rg Veda*
and other texts.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p154}**Intercidona** 139

One of the most important of the Vedic deities. It from across the sea
and then disappeared, never is uncertain if he originated as a weather
god or as to return. He may also be classed as one of the a solar deity.
The *Rg Veda* identifies him with the Nordic AESIR gods.

bull and he is considered to be related to the Hittite weather god
TESˇUB. He is thus also god of fertility and war. In the later Vedas he
is described **Inkanyamba**

as the son of DYAUS PITAR and PRTHIVI. His con-Storm god. Zulu
\[southern Africa\]. The deity sort is INDRANI and his sons are JAYANTA,
Mid-specifically responsible for tornados and per-husa, Nilambara, RBHUS
and RSABHA.

ceived as a huge snake coiling down from heaven In later Hinduism he is
a *dikpala* (guardian) of to earth. According to some Zulu authorities,
the eastern direction.

Inkanyamba is a goddess of storms and water.

2\. In Buddhism Indra is a *dikpala* with the color yellow, but of
lesser importance than the Hindu god.

**Inmar**

3\. In Jainism Indra is a head of various heavens Sky god(dess). Votyak
(Finno-Ugric). The name but, again, of lesser importance.

became incorporated into Christian tradition and interpreted as "the
mother of God."

**Indrani**

Goddess of wrath. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic).

**Inmutef** *(pillar of his mother)* Daughter of Puloman, a demonic
figure killed by Minor god. Egyptian. The "bearer of the heav-the god
INDRA, and the SAKTI and consort of Indra.

ens," his cult is linked with that of the goddess One of seven MATARAS
(mothers) who in later HATHOR.

Hinduism became regarded as of evil intent. Also one of a group of eight
ASTAMATARAS personifying jealousy (also named Aindri in this capacity).
In another grouping one of nine N

**Insitor**

AVASAKTIS or astral

deities who, in southern India, rank higher than the Minor god of
agriculture. Roman. The deity conS

cerned with sowing of crops.

APTAMATARAS. Her attendant animal is either an elephant or a lion.
Attributes: hook, rosary, Santana flower, staff and waterjar. One
thousand-eyed. Also Aindri; Mahendri; Paulomi; Saci; Sujata.

**Intal** *(gods their father)* God of fire. Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. Associated with paternalism and **Indukari**

one of the group classed as the XIUHTECUHTLI Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). Consort of complex.

the god SAMBA. Attribute: a shield.

**Intercidona**

**Ing**

Minor goddess of birth. Roman. A guardian deity Ancestral god.
Anglo-Saxon. According to a runic invoked to keep evil spirits away from
the new-poem he is the father of the Saxons and appeared born child.
Symbolized by a cleaver.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p155}140 **Inti**

**Inti** *(sun)*

and wet nurse to the king. She is also perceived to Sun god. Inca
(pre-Columbian South America) exert a benign influence on amulets.
Depicted as

\[Peru, etc\]. His consort is the moon goddess a hippopotamus or
anthropomorphically with a MAMA-KILYA. Inti was depicted as a trinity in
the hippo's head. Also Ipet.

sanctuaries in Cuzco, possibly in deference to the Christian Trinity.
The Temple of the Sun is reported to have housed images, in gold, of all
the **Iris** *(rainbow)*

sky gods in the Inca pantheon on more or less Messenger goddess. Greek
and Roman. The spe-equal terms, since the sun is regarded as one of cial
attendant of the goddess HERA, Iris is a virgin many great celestial
powers. Inti may also have goddess who forms the rainbow bridge between
been depicted as a face on a gold disc. The so-heaven and earth.
Depicted with wings and car-called "fields of the sun" supported the
Inca rying a staff.

priesthood. The three sun deities are Apo-Inti (lord sun), Cori-Inti
(son sun) and Inti-Wawqi (sun brother). The sun god(s) is perceived as
the **Irmin**

progenitor of the Inca rulers at Cuzco through War god. Germanic.
Probably equating with two children---a son Manco Capac and his
sis-TIWAZ, the name implies one of great strength. In ter/consort Mama
Ocllo Huaco. The Quechua Saxony, there is the so-called Irmin pillar
which Indians of the central Andes call the same deity may be a
reference to the deity.

Inti Huayna Capac and perceive him as part of a trinity with the
Christian god and Christ.

**Iruva**

Sun god. African. A number of tribes worship the **Io**

See KIHO.

sun by this generic name, particularly in Cameroon, Congo and Tanzania.

**Iord**

Earth goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). In Viking tra-Isa (1)

dition lord embodies the abstract sacredness of the 1. An aspect of
SˇIVA. Hindu (Puranic). Also a *dik-earth. Said to be the mother of THOR
and in some *pala* or guardian of the northeastern quarter; and legends,
the wife of OTHIN.*

an EKADASARUDRA (one of the eleven rudras).

*See also* FJORGYN.

Rides upon a goat or a bull. Color: white. Attributes: five arrows, ax,
drum, fruit, hatchet, hook, **Ipalnemoani**

*(he who through one lives)*

lute, noose, rosary, staff. Three-eyed.

Creator god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) 2. Guardian deity. Buddhist.
A minor *dikpala*

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the O

attended by a bull. Color: white. Attributes: cup, ME-moon disc and
trident.

TEOTL complex.

**Ipy**

**Isa (2)**

Mother goddess. Egyptian. In the Pyramid Texts River goddess. Songhai
\[Niger, West Africa\]. The Ipy appears occasionally as a benevolent
guardian mother goddess of the river Niger.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p156}**ISIS** 141

**Isˇara**

**ISIS**

Goddess of marriage and childbirth. Meso-ORIGIN Egyptian. Mother
goddess.

potamian (Babylonian-Akkadian) and west-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP Early
dynastic ern Semitic. Also a deity concerned with the period (circa 2700
BC) and probably earlier until enforcing of oaths. Known chiefly from
early the end of Egyptian history (circa AD 400).

inscriptions and some Akkadian texts. Her **SYNONYMS** none.

Mesopotamian cult center was the Babylonian **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
universal throughout areas town of Kisurra, but she is also thought to
have of Egyptian influence, but particularly at Giza been worshiped
across a wide area among Syrians, and at Behbeit el-Hagar in the Nile
delta. Also Canaanites and Hittites. Her symbol is the scor-at Thebes on
the west bank, at Dendara and in pion. Also Esˇara.

the temple of Seti I at Abydos. A GrecoRoman sanctuary existed on Philae
(now moved to Agilqiya).

**Isdes**

**ART REFERENCES** monumental carving; contem-Chthonic god of death.
Egyptian. Known from porary sculptures; wall paintings and reliefs.

the Middle Kingdom onward he is one of the **LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid
Texts; the *Great* minor deities concerned with the judgment of the
*Hymn to Isis* from the stele of Amenemose dead. He became syncretized
with ANUBIS.

(Louvre); etc.

Isis is one of the great deities of the Egyptian **Ishi-Kori-Dome**

pantheon and, with OSIRIS, probably maintained God(dess) of stone
cutters. Shinto \[Japan\]. Of the most universal appeal outside Egypt.
Greco-ambiguous gender, this deity created the stone Roman culture was
particularly enamored of her mold into which the bronze was cast to and
called her the *Stella Maris* (star of the sea), make the perfect divine
mirror. It was used so represented in the heavens by the north star. An
that AMATERASU, the sun goddess, could see her offspring of GEB and NUT
in the Heliopolis glorious reflection and so be enticed from the
genealogy, Isis is the mother of the god kings of dark cave where she
had hidden herself to Egypt and both elder sister and consort of Osiris.

escape the excesses of the god SUSANO-WO.

The other siblings include SETH and NEPHTHYS.

Ishi-Kori-Dome is also the tutelary deity of Isis is depicted in human
form, but usually wear-mirror makers and was one of the escorts for ing
a crown in the form of a throne or cow horns Prince NINIGI when he
descended from heaven encircling a sun disc (see HATHOR). She may also
to earth. Generally invoked beside fire and be depicted, wholly or in
part, as a hawk. From smith KAMIS.

the New Kingdom (circa 1500 BC) onward she is also associated with a
device not dissimilar to the *ankh* symbol and known as the "Isis knot."
The **Isimud**

symbol was incorporated into a bloodstone Messenger god. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian).

amulet known as the *tyet.*

Readily identified by possessing two faces lookIn legend she is
responsible twice for restoring ing in opposite directions, Isimud is
the mes-Osiris, once after Seth has thrown his body into senger of the
god ENKI. Also Isinu; Usumu the Nile and again after Seth has
dismembered it.

(Akkadian).

She impregnates herself from his corpse as he is

[]{#index_split_003.html#p157}142 **ISˇKUR**

entering the underworld as its ruler, and from the skies in a chariot,
dispensing raindrops and Osiris's semen conceives HORUS, to whom she
hailstones. In one text he is identified as the son gives birth in the
papyrus swamps at Khemmis in of AN and twin brother of Enki. He is to be
com-the Nile delta. Thus, since Horus instilled himself pared with
NINURTA who was primarily a god of into the king of Egypt during life,
and Osiris took farmers. He was also adopted by the Hittites as a over
on death (see also Horus and Osiris), the storm god.

ruler was perceived to suckle at the breast of Isis (as HARPOKRATES). As
Isis guarded Horus against injury, so she also protected the earthly
king of **Issaki**

Egypt as a child. In the courts of the gods, Isis put Goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). Depicted up a strong challenge in support of Horus's
claim carrying a headless child. Also Kerala.

to the throne against that of her brother Seth, and she showed Seth to
be guilty of buggery against Horus.

**Istadevata**

In the Greco-Roman period, Isis sanctuaries 1. Generic title of a
personal god. Hindu. The were built on the island of Delos and at
Pompeii.

name given to a deity chosen by an individual for There is much argument
that the Isis cult influ-special worship in return for protection and
spir-enced the portrayal of the Christian Virgin Mary, itual guidance.
Also the name given to a house-who was also known as *Stella Maris* and
whose hold icon.

portraits with the Christ often bear a striking sim-2. Tutelary god.
Buddhist, particularly in Tibet.

ilarity to those of Isis with Horus.

The personal deity of one preparing for Tantric initiation.

**ISˇKUR**

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian) \[Iraq\]. Storm **Isťanu**

god.

Sun god. Hittite. A god of judgment, depicted **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC, and bearing a winged sun on his crown or
headdress, probably earlier, until circa 1750 BC.

and a crooked staff.

**SYNONYMS** ADAD (Akkadian).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Karkara.

**ART REFERENCES** plaques: votive stelae; glyptics, **ISŤAR**

*(star of heaven)*

etc.

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian) **LITERARY SOURCES**
cuneiform texts.

\[Iraq\]. Goddess of fertility and war.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 2500 BC until The chief rain and
thunder god of herdsmen, circa AD 200.

Isˇkur is described as the brother of the sun god **SYNONYMS** INANA
\[Sumerian\].

UTU. In creation mythology Isˇkur is given charge **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
throughout Mesopotamia over the winds, the so-called "silver lock of the
particularly at Babylon and Nineveh, with heart of heaven," by the god
ENKI. According to smaller sanctuaries across a more extensive area some
authors, in prehistoric times he was per-of the ancient world including
Mari.

ceived as a bull or as a lion whose roar is the thun-ART REFERENCES
votive inscriptions; cylinder der. He may be depicted as a warrior
riding across seals and seal impressions; limestone reliefs, etc.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p158}**ITZAM NA** 143

**LITERARY SOURCES** cuneiform texts including the gods in war as a
herald but was nonetheless *The Descent of Isťar, Gilgamesˇ and Etana;*
temple generally regarded as benevolent. Known partic-hymns.

ularly from the Babylonian legend of *Erra and* *Isˇum.* Also ENDURSAGA.

Isťar is probably the most significant and influential of all ancient
Near Eastern goddesses. She is the counterpart of, and largely takes
over from, **Isvara**

the Sumerian Inana. She is the daughter, in sep-Epithet of the god
SˇIVA. Hindu (Puranic). In San-arate traditions, of the moon god SIN and
of the skrit designated the "supreme god who rules the god of heaven
ANU. She is generally depicted with universe." The generic title of a
Hindu's personal wings and with weapon cases at her shoulders.

high god. In Buddhism the name of a *YAKSA* She may carry a ceremonial
double-headed mace-attending the eleventh *tirthankara.*

scimitar embellished with lion heads and is frequently accompanied by a
lion. She is symbolized by an eight-pointed star.

**Itonde**

In Egypt she was revered as a goddess of heal-God of death. Mongo and
Nkundo \[central ing. There is evidence from the el-Amarna letters
Democratic Republic of Congo, Africa\]. He that Amenhotep III, who
apparently suffered consumes rats as food and is also the god of from
severe tooth abscesses, was loaned a statue hunters in the dark jungle
forests. Described in of Isťar from Nineveh in the hopes that its
cura-the *Epic of Lianja* as the first man to die whose tive powers
might help his suffering.

spirit reincarnated at the instant of death, into his son LIANJA. He
possesses a bell with magical properties, the *elefo,* by which he
predicts **Isťaran**

where death will strike.

Local god. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). The tutelary god of the city of Der,
east of the river Tigris in northern Babylonia. Also GUSILIM.

**Itzam Cab**

Chthonic earth god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The earth
aspect of the creator **Isten**

god ITZAM NA. He is also a god of fire, and Creator god. Pre-Christian
Hungarian. Accord-hearthstones are called "head of Itzam Cab."

ing to tradition, his sacred animal, the eagle, Sticks of firewood are
his thighs, flames his guided the Hungarian people to their homeland.

tongue and the pot resting on the fire his liver. In Other attributes
include arrow, horse phallus and his vegetation aspect he is depicted
with leaves of tree.

maize sprouting from his head.

**Isˇum**

**ITZAM NA** *(iguana house)* Minor god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-ORIGIN
Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-Akkadian). The brother of SˇAMASˇ,
the sun god, ico\]. Creator god.

and an attendant of the plague god ERRA. He may **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 300 until have been a god of fire and, according to
texts, led circa AD 900.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p159}144 **Itzcuintli** **SYNONYMS** HUNAB KU;
Hun Itzamna; Yaxcocah-Itzpapalotl *(obsidian butterfly)* mut; God K.

Minor mother goddess. Aztec (classical Meso-CENTER(S) OF CULT Chichen
Itza and other sites, american) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as
mainly in the Yucatan peninsula.

the TETEOINNAN complex. Also recognized as a **ART REFERENCES** stone
carvings, codex illustra-fire goddess.

tions.

**LITERARY SOURCES** mainly the *Vienna* Codex.

**Itzpapalotl-Itzcueye**

*(possessor of obsidian*

The principal god in the Mayan pantheon *skirt)*

according to the *Vienna* codex. He lives in the sky Minor mother
goddess. Aztec (classical Meso-and sends the rain. Also a god of
medicine and a american) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as fire
god. By tradition the Maya believed that the the TETEOINNAN complex.
Limited to the Valley world was set within a vast house, the walls and
of Mexico.

roof of which were formed by four huge iguanas standing upright but with
their heads bent downwards. Each reptile has its own direction and
**Itztapal Totec**

*(our lord the stone slab)*

color.

Fertility god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Itzam Na is not invoked in
the rites of modern

\[Mexico\]. A god of agriculture but also a patron of Yucatan peasants
but, at one time, was the subject precious metallurgists. One of the
group classed of a ritual which involved daubing the lowest step as the
X

of a sanctuary with mud and the other steps with IPE TOTEC complex.

blue pigment (the color peculiar to rain gods). At Chichen Itza
sacrifice was regularly made to a **ltztli**

huge crocodile believed to be the personification *(obsidian blade)*

of the god.

God of justice. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Itzam Na is probably the
same deity as Hunab

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the TEZ-Ku, who is identified in
some texts as his father, CATLIPOCA complex.

but in the guise of a reptile. He may also be depicted
anthropomorphically. In his aspect as a vegetation god, Itzam Na may be
the same as the **Iunones**

so-called God K of the codices, recognized by a Goddesses of femininity.
Greco-Roman. Gener-long branching nose in the form of a pair of ally
depicted as a trio of *MATRES*. A shrine at infolded leaves. His earthly
aspect is called ITZAM

Saintes Maries on the Rhone delta was originally CAB, in which guise
maize leaves sprout from the dedicated to the Iunones Augustae.

top of his head.

**Iusaas**

**Itzcuintli**

Creator goddess. Egyptian (Lower). Locally Goddess of hearths. Aztec
(classical Mesoameri-known from Heliopolis and perceived as being a can)
\[Mexico\]. A guardian deity of the home per-feminine principle in the
cosmos equating to the sonified by fire. One of the group classed as the
sun god ATUM. Depicted anthropomorphically XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

with a scarab on her head.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p160}**Ixtlilton** 145

**Iuturna**

**Ix Zacal Nok**

*(lady cloth-weaver)*

Goddess of springs and wells. Roman. Invoked Creator goddess. Mayan
(classical Mesoameri-particularly in times of drought.

can) \[Mexico\]. The consort of the sun god Kinich Ahau and also the
inventor of weaving. She may represent another aspect of the mother
goddess **Ix Chebel Yax**

COLEL CAB. Also Ix Azal Uoh; Ixchel.

Mother goddess. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) *See also* AH KIN.

\[Mexico\]. Goddess of weaving and patroness of weavers, whose tutelage
is shared with IX CHEL.

*See also* CHIBIRIAS.

**Ixcozauhqui**

*(yellow face in the house)*

God of fire. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Associated with
paternalism and one of the **Ix Chel**

group classed as the XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

Moon goddess. Mayan (Yucatec and Quiche, classical Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. Also the goddess of childbirth and medicine and of
rain-Ixnextli

*(eye-lashes)*

bows. A consort of the sun god. She has a major Goddess of weavers.
Aztec (classical Mesoameri-shrine as Cozumel and small figurines of the
can) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the goddess have been
conventionally placed TETEOINNAN complex.

beneath the beds of women in labor. Such women are considered to be in
great danger at **Ixpuztec**

*(broken face)*

times of lunar eclipse when the unborn child Minor underworld god. Aztec
(classical Meso-may develop deformities. Ix Chel is a guardian american)
\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as against disease and the Quiche
Indians regard the Mictlantecuhtli complex.

her as a goddess of fertility and sexual intercourse.

A goddess of weaving, believed to be the first
**Ixquimilli-Itzlacoliuhqui** *(eye-bundle* being on earth to weave
cloth, she was employed *curved obsidian blade)*

in this craft when she first attracted the attention God of justice.
Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) of the sun god. She carries her loom
sticks across

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the TEZ-the sky to protect her
from jaguars. Under Chris-CATLIPOCA complex.

tian influence she has been largely syncretized with the Virgin Mary.
Also Goddess 1.

*See also* IX CHEBEL YAX.

**Ixtab**

Goddess. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Tutelary goddess of
suicide victims.

**Ix Kanan**

Vegetation goddess. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The
guardian of the bean plant.

**Ixtlilton**

*(little black face)*

Her consort is the maize god IH P'EN. The cou-Minor god of sexual lust.
Aztec (classical Meso-ple are invoked at sowing time when turkeys and
american) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as chickens are
sacrificed.

the XIUHTECUHTLI complex.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p161}146 **Izanagi-No-Kami**
**Izanagi-No-Kami**

*(his augustness the one*

most significant offspring include AMATERASU, *who invites)*

the sun goddess, born from his nose and SUSANO-Creator god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of seventeen WO, the storm god, born from his left eye,
who beings involved in creation. His consort is are the joint rulers of
the universe. Also Izanagi-IZANAMI-NO-KAMI. They are strictly of
Japanese No-Mikoto.

origin with no Chinese or Buddhist influence.

Jointly they are responsible to the other fifteen primordial deities to
"make, consolidate and give **Izanami-No-Kami**

*(her augustness the one*

birth to this drifting land." The reference, in the *who invites)*

*Kojiki* sacred text, is to the reed beds which were Creator goddess.
Shinto \[Japan\]. See IZANAGI-considered to float on the primal waters.
The pair NO-KAMI for full details. Izanami was burned to were granted a
heavenly jeweled spear and they death by the birth of the fire god
HI-NO-KAGU-stood upon the floating bridge of heaven, stirring TSUCHI,
after which the eight thunders sprang the waters with the spear. When
the spear was from her corpse. Also Izanami-No-Mikoto.

pulled up, the brine which dripped from it created the island of
Onogoro, the first dry land, believed to be the island of Nu-Shima on
the southern **Izquitecatl**

coast of Awagi. According to mythology, the pair Fertility god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) created two beings, a son HIRUKO and an island

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the Ome-Ahaji. They generated
the remaining fourteen tochtli complex personifying the maguey or agave
islands which make up Japan and then set about plant from which a potent
drink called pulque is creating the rest of the KAMI pantheon. Izanagi's
brewed.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p162}J6

**Jabru**

him and the resultant half-finished freak was Sky god. Elamite \[Iran\].
Local deity largely Jagannath.

eclipsed by AN.

In an unusual departure from normal ritual practice, the image of
Jagannath is removed from his sanctuary at Puri for a week each year and
**JAGANNATH**

*(lord of the world)*

aired in public view. Two festivals, the *Rathayatra* **ORIGIN** Hindu
(Puranic) \[India\]. Transmutation and *Snanayatra,* are dedicated to
Jagannath and of the essence of the god Visňu.

his siblings.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 400 and probably earlier until
present day.

**SYNONYMS** Jaggernaut.

**Jagaubis**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Bengal and Puri (Oríssa).

Fire god. Pre-Christian Lithuanian. Largely **ART REFERENCES** bronze
sculptures. Well-known eclipsed by GABIJA.

wooden image at Puri.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Ramayana* epic; Puranic texts.

**Jahwe**

See YHWH.

Jagannath occupies an obscure position. His sister is SUBHADRA and his
brother Balabhadra.

**Jakomba**

He is depicted in hideous fashion as a monster God of morality. Bangala
\[Democratic Republic with an enormous head and bulging eyes, but of
Congo, central Africa\]. Also known as the god with no legs and only the
stumps of arms.

of hearts, he controls human thought. Also Nza-According to legend, when
VISŇU was acci-komba.

dently slain by a hunter, his bones were placed in a box and VISVAKARMA,
the Hindu god of artisans, was commissioned to create a new
**Jalinprabha**

*(light of the sun)*

body to cover the bones. His agreement was God. Buddhist. A BODHISATTVA
or *buddha*-

conditional on no one seeing the work until it designate. Color: red.
Attributes: staff, sun disc was finished. KRSNA's curiosity got the
better of and sword. Also Suryaprabha.

147

[]{#index_split_003.html#p163}148 **Jambhala** **Jambhala**
*(devouring)* APOLLO, born in Thessaly, he founded the city of God.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of Janiculum on the Tiber.

AKSOBHYA, RATNASAMBHAVA or Vajrasattva, or a Janus is depicted with two
faces turned in oppo-collective emanation of the five DHYANIBUD-site
directions, symbolizing his dominance over DHAS *,* he is the equal of
the Hindu god KUBERA.

past and future. He holds a key in his right hand His SAKTI is VASUDHARA
and he may stand upon and a staff in his left when invoked as guardian
of a man or a conch. Color: blue or white. Attrib-a gate or roadway;
alternatively he holds the num-utes: arrow, bow, cup, hook, Ichneumon
fly, bers 300 and 65 when presiding over the start of image of Aksobhya
in the hair, jewel, noose, a new year. He is also equated with the
rising and other jewels, staff, sword and trident. Three-setting of the
sun. Each new season, and the dawn headed, each head representing one of
the three of each day was sacred to Janus. He was particu-named
Dhyanibuddhas *.*

larly celebrated at New Year and the month name January is derivative.
The Janus Quadrifons temple was reputedly a perfectly symmetrical
square, **Janguli**

*(knowledge of poisons)*

each side possessing one door representing each Snake goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). Prevents of the four seasons, and three windows collec-and
cures snake bite. An emanation of AKSOBHYA.

tively comprising the twelve months of the year.

Also one of a group of DHARANIS (deification of Buddhist texts).
Accompanied by a snake or other unidentified creature. Color: green,
white or **Jarri**

yellow. Attributes: arrow, blue lotus, bow, image of Plague god. Hittite
and Hurrian. Also war god Aksobhya on crown, lute, peacock feather,
snake, known as the "lord of the bow" who protected the staff, sword and
trident. One- or three-headed.

king in battle.

**JANUS**

**Jayakara** *(victorious)* **ORIGIN** Roman. God of passage.

God. Buddhist. Probably of Hindu derivation, he **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to rides in a carriage drawn by cockatoos. Color:
circa AD 400.

white. Attributes: arrow, bow, garland and wine **SYNONYMS** Ianus.

glass.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** many sanctuaries throughout Italy, including the
celebrated Janus Quadrifons temple (not extant).

**Jayanta** *(victorious)* **ART REFERENCES** sculptures and relief
carvings.

God. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). One of the sons **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Aeneid* (Virgil).

of INDRA, and one of the eleven EKADASARUDRAS

or forms of the god RUDRA. Attributes: arrow, ax, Janus is generally
known as the "god with two bow, club, cup, drum, hammer, hook, prayer
faces" and is the deity responsible for gates, door-wheel, rosary,
spear, trident and waterjar.

ways and of all beginnings. He is also specifically a benign intercessor
in times of war. He has no Greek counterpart but is the god of past,
present **Jayatara**

*(victorious Tara)*

and future. According to legend the son of Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana).

[]{#index_split_003.html#p164}**Junrojin** 149

**Jaya-Vijaya**

*(victorious)*

**Jokinam**

Twin goddesses. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).

Lake god. Lake Albert \[East Africa\]. The owner Possibly forms of DURGA
accompanied by a of the "lake cows" which graze at the bottom of lion.

Lake Albert and which are herded by drowned fishermen.

**Jehovah**

Creator god. Christian. The name came into **Jumis**

usage from circa AD 1200 and is an adulteration Fertility god.
Pre-Christian Latvian. Symbolized which has largely replaced the title
YHWH in the by cereal stalks joined at the heads, or bent over
English-speaking churches.

and buried in the ground.

*See also* YHWH.

**JUNO**

**Jnanadakini**

*(knowledge)*

**ORIGIN** Roman. Queen of heaven.

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to AKSOBHYA and the SAKTI of yogambara. Color:
circa AD 400.

blue. Attributes: ax, bell, club, cup, staff and **SYNONYMS** HERA
(Greek).

sword.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Sparta, Rome and Heraeum.

**ART REFERENCES** large numbers of sculptures.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Aeneid* (Virgil) etc.

**Jnanaparamita**

*(perfection of knowledge)*

Philosophical deity. Buddhist. Spiritual offspring Juno is modeled on
the Greek goddess Hera. In of RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: white. Attributes:
the the Roman pantheon she is the daughter of Cronos tree of wisdom and
a jeweled banner.

and RHEA and the sister and incestuous consort of JUPITER, who seduced
her in the guise of a cuckoo.

Following their wedding on Mount Olympus, **Jnanavasita**

*(control of knowledge)*

Juno was accorded the title of goddess of marriage, Minor goddess.
Buddhist. One of a group of though subsequently she was obliged to
endure VASITAS personifying the disciplines of spiritual Jupiter's
philandering with numerous concubines.

regeneration. Color: whitish blue. Attributes: Juno is the mother of
MARS, Vulcan and HEBE.

sword on a blue lotus.

Her sacred animals are the peacock and the cuckoo and she is invariably
depicted in majestic apparel.

Her chief festival in Rome was the *Matronalia.*

**Jok**

*See also* KRONOS, VULCANUS.

Creator god. African. A generic term employed by a large number of
tribes. Generally the *jok* is represented by a totem and also has an
**Junrojin**

animal name. The Acholi in Uganda perceive *jok* God of luck. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of seven to live in caves to which they deliver food and
deities in Shintoism concerned with fortune.

drink offerings. For the Shilluk in Sudan, Jwok He is depicted as a
Chinese hermit and is some-created mankind from river clay.

times confused with the god FUKUROKUJU. A

[]{#index_split_003.html#p165}150 **JUPITER**

small figure with a large head, he carries a staff This was later
revised to include Jupiter, Juno and to which is attached a little book.
By tradition MINERVA, all three of whom shared the Capito-the book
contains information about the lifes-line Temple.

pan of each mortal person. He is accompanied Jupiter became known under
a variety of assim-by a black deer, said to have been made thus by
ilated names. Thus he was Jupiter Victor leading old age.

the legions to victory, or Jupiter Stator when they were in a defensive
role, or Jupiter Protector.

Away from Rome he was allied with the Syr-JUPITER

ian/Hittite god DOLICHENUS and in this form **ORIGIN** Roman. Head of
the Roman pantheon.

became popular with the Roman military with **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 400 BC to shrines as far away as Britain.

circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** Iuppiter; Jove; Juppiter.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout Roman world.

**Juventas**

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures, reliefs, etc.

Goddess of youth. Roman. Modeled on the **LITERARY SOURCES** *Aeneid*
(Virgil).

Greek goddess HEBE.

Jupiter parallels the Greek supreme deity ZEUS, as **Jvaraharisvara**
*(lord of fever)* the father of the gods. His origins lie in the
Indo-Plague god. Hindu. Associated with malaria, par-European sky god
DYAUS PITAR. His consort is ticularly in Bengal.

JUNO. His main sanctuary is located on the Capitoline Hill in Rome and
epithets include Tonans (thunderer) and Fulgurator (sender of lightning)
**Jyestha**

although he is, above all, the giver of the bright Goddess of
misfortune. Hindu (Puranic and ear-light of day. He is, like Zeus,
believed to hurl lier). The elder sister of the goddess LAKSMI,
thunderbolts from the sky and he was represented Jyestha personifies
poverty and is depicted with a in the sanctuary of Jupiter Feretrius by
a crude large belly and long nose. In earlier Hinduism lump of stone. He
is particularly responsible for she was worshiped particularly in
southern India.

the honoring of oaths which led to the practice of Also a *NAKSATRA* of
evil influence; daughter of swearing in his name.

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA). Her animal In Rome he formed part of an
early trinity with is an ass. Attributes: arrow, banner with crow, cup,
MARS, god of war and farming, and QUIRINUS.

blue lotus, hair-ornament and staff.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p166}K

6

**Ka Tyeleo**

**Ka'cak**

Creator god. Senufo \[Ivory Coast, West Africa\].

Sea spirit. Siberian Inuit \[eastern Siberia\]. A Significantly in such
an environment, according fierce old woman who lives in the ocean depths
to tradition, he fashioned the fruit-bearing trees and owns all the
creatures of the sea. She is on the seventh day of creation.

said to feed off the bodies of drowned fishermen and is the subject of
sacrifice.

*See also* ARNAKUA'GSAK.

**Kabeiroi**

Blacksmith gods. Greek. According to tradition the sons or grandsons of
the blacksmith god **Kacchapesvara** *(lord of the tortoise)* H

God. Hindu (Puranic). An epithet of SˇIVA. In EPHAISTOS. The cult was
centered particularly on Lemnos, where there was an Etruscan
tradi-certain artworks, particularly those inscribed tion until circa
500

on linga stones, VISŇU, in his aspect of BC, and at Thebes. The

Kabeiroi are thought to derive from pre-Greek KURMA(VATARA), the
tortoise, is depicted wor-Asian fertility deities in Anatolia
\[Turkey\].

shiping Sˇiva. These illustrations were designed by Saivites as part of
a propaganda exercise to demonstrate the superiority of Sˇiva over
Visňu.

**Kabta**

God of artisans. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). In **Kadesˇ**

creation mythology he is given charge over brick-Fertility goddess.
Canaanite. Depicted naked car-molds and pickaxes.

rying a snake and usually standing upon a lion.

Taken over by the Egyptians (see QUADESˇ).

**Kabrakan**

Earthquake god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) **Kadru**

*(russet)*

\[Mexico\]. The so-called "destroyer of mountains"

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of the usually coupled with the
god ZIPAKNA who builds daughters of DAKSA, consort of KASYAPA and
mountains.

mother of the *nagas* (snake demons).

151

[]{#index_split_003.html#p167}152 **Kagu-Tsuchi-No-Kami**
**Kagu-Tsuchi-No-Kami**

**Kakaku**

Fire god. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of a number of River god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. His name is often fire KAMIS who are honored in special
*Hi-Matsuri* inscribed on the edge tiles of a house to protect
festivals. He is worshiped in the mountain shrine against fire.

of Kono-Jinja. The sacred fire can only be generated by a board and
stick and this is regarded as a powerful purifier in Shintoism. The most
cele-Kakasya

*(crow faced)*

brated temple of the fire *kamis* is situated on Minor goddess.
Buddhist. No further informa-Mount Atago near Kyoto to which worshipers
tion available.

are drawn from all over Japan to obtain charms as protection against
fire.

**Kakka**

Minor god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Kahilan

Akkadian). He was the attendant and minister Tutelary god. Pre-Islamic
Arabian. Known only of state to both ANU and ANSˇAR, and is known from
inscriptions.

particularly from the text of *Nergal and Eresˇkigal.*

**Kahukura**

God of agriculture and creator of the rainbow.

**Kakupacat**

*(fiery glance)*

Polynesian and Maori. The son of RONGOMAI, War god. Mayan (classical
Mesoamerican\] \[Mex-Kahukura is invoked for the well-being of crops
ico\]. Said to bear a shield of fire with which he and in some regions
the name appears to be syn-protects himself in battle.

onymous with that of RONGOMATANE, the god of agriculture. Kahukura is
particularly associated with a staple vegetable of the Maori, the
*kumara*, a **Kala**

root tuber that was introduced to New Zealand by God of death. Hindu
(Vedic and Puranic). An epi-man and is said to possess many magical
properties.

thet of YAMA and occasionally of SˇIVA. Also the Kahukura is not to be
confused with a legendary personification of time in the *Atharvaveda.*

character of the same name, a mortal hero who, in antiquity, learned the
art of making fish nets.

**Kala-Bhadra**

Minor goddess of death. Hindu (Puranic). An **Kai Yum** *(singing lord)*
auspicious attendant of funerals who is invoked in God of music. Mayan
(Lacandon) (classical burial grounds in order to safeguard the passage
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. He lives in the sky and of the dead to the
otherworld. She is sometimes is attendant on CACOCH, one of the aspects
the referred to as Karala-Bhadra.

Mayan creator god. Depicted as a brazier shaped like a pottery drum.

**Kalacakra**

*(time wheel)*

**Kaikara**

Tutelary god. Buddhist (Mahayana) and Lamaist Harvest goddess. Bunyoro
\[Uganda, East Africa\].

\[Tibet\]. One of a group of *yi-dam* tutelary Propitiated before
harvesting with offerings of deities chosen on a basis of personal
selection.

millet.

Perceived as time in the form of a CAKRA

[]{#index_split_003.html#p168}**Kalika** 153

(rotating wheel) and one who dominates the or dripping with blood and
claw-like hands with Hindu gods KAMA and RUDRA. SAKTI with two long
nails. Her tongue often protrudes. She has to four heads. Color: blue.
Attributes: a large no special vehicle but may be seen dancing on a
variety held in up to twenty-four hands. Typi-prostrate Sˇiva. She
possesses ten (sometimes as cally four-headed.

many as eighteen) arms and may wear a necklace of skulls, a belt of
severed arms, earrings of children's corpses, and snakes as bracelets.
Often she **Kaladuti**

*(messenger of death)*

is half-naked with black skin. Kali is depicted Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). May be accom-wading through gore on the battlefield and
drink-panied by a horse. Color: red. Attributes: cow ing the blood of
her victims. Frequently she holds head, cup, hammer and trident.

a severed head in one of her hands and a large sword in another. At
cremation sites she sits upon the body of the deceased surrounded by
attendant **Kalavikarnika**

jackals.

Fever goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Attributes There are also more benign
aspects of Kali. She include a cup or skull.

slaughters demons and sometimes her hands are raised in blessing. The
conflict of her personality follows the widely held notion that out of
destruc-KALI (1)

tion comes rebirth.

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Puranic) \[India\]. Goddess of Kali is worshiped in
Bengal during the destruction.

*Dipavali* festival. In southern India she is wor-KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP circa AD 400, shiped as a distinct plague goddess associated but
known from much earlier times, until with cholera.

present.

**SYNONYMS** many epithets, also linked with Durga.

**Kali (2)**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** chiefly in Bengal.

Goddess of learning. Jain. One of sixteen headed **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures in stone and bronze.

by the goddess SARASVATI.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Ramayana* epic and various Puranic texts.

**Kaligni-Rudra**

*(the funerary fire Rudra)*

Kali is the most terrible and malignant aspect of Minor god. Hindu
(Puranic). A violent represen-the goddess Sakti (see also Durga) though
the tation of SˇIVA who is attendant at cremations and name Kali is an
epithet applied to several god-whose warlike attributes include sword,
shield, desses. She is the central figure of the *sakta* cult in bow and
arrow.

Bengal. Her consort is generally perceived as SˇIVA, whom she aids and
abets in his more malignant aspects. She is also one of the MAHAVIDYA
**Kalika** *(black)*

personifications of the SAKTI of Sˇiva. In her earli-1. Goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). Often est form she may have been the
personification of depicted standing upon a corpse. Color: dark the
spirit of evil.

blue. Attributes: cup and knife.

She is depicted variously with long ragged 2. Goddess. Hindu (Puranic).
A SAKTI of locks, fang-like teeth or even tusks, lips smeared NIRRTI,
and an epithet of DURGA.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p169}154 **Kalisia** **Kalisia**

destiny of the infant. Consort of the sky god Creator god. Pigmy
\[Democratic Republic of Nun. Her sacred animals include the hare and
Congo and Congo, central Africa\]. The guardian the goose and she may be
symbolized by a birch of hunters and the jungle forests. Pigmy hunters
tree.

invoke the god with special rituals and he delivers dream messages
identifying the location of game.

**Kalunga**

Creator god. Ndonga \[northern Namibia, south-Kaliya

ern Africa\]. Said to take the form of a giant man Minor serpent god.
Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One who is always partially hidden by clouds
and gen-of the *nagas* in the endless conflict between good erally seen
only by women intermediaries known and evil, he poisoned the fresh water
with his as *nelagos* who go to converse with him in sacred venom. The
young KRSNA revived all the life which places. He is the father of
MUSISI. The god is had drunk from it and then almost destroyed Kaliya
invoked at times of warfare and illness, but also as before taking the
snake as one of his followers. By a fertility deity and before making a
journey.

tradition he lives in depths of the river Yamuna.

**KAMA(DEVA)** *(desire)*

**Kalki(n)**

*(with white horse)*

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Puranic) \[India\]. God of carnal Horse god. Hindu
(Vedic, Epic and Puranic).

love.

Possibly the tenth *avatara* of VISŇU. He rewards **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1000 BC, and the good and punishes evil. The counterpart
of probably earlier, until present.

the Buddhist deity MAITREYA. Horses became **SYNONYMS** Kama; MANMATHA;
Ananga.

associated with divine kingship in ancient India **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
various.

because of their speed of movement. Solar deities **ART REFERENCES**
stone and metal sculptures; were perceived to ride horses across the sky
and reliefs.

horse sacrifice became highly significant. Kalki is **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Ramayana* epic and various depicted either anthropomorphically or with
the Puranic texts.

head of a horse and has four arms. He is attended by a white horse.
Attributes: arrow, conch, prayer As god of love Kamadeva stimulates
physical wheel, shield and sword. Also Visňuyasas.

desire. The son of VISŇU and LAKSMI, or of their reincarnations KRSNA
and RUKMINI, in which instance he is titled Kama. An alternative
leg-Kalligeneia

endary beginning accounts that he rose Obscure birth goddess. Greek.
Known only from from the heart of the creator god BRAHMA. His ritual
texts in Athens.

chief ally is the god of spring, Vasanta, his principal consort the
goddess of affection, RATI, and he is attended by a band of nymphs, the
*APSARAS*.

**Kaltesh**

Kamadeva is depicted as a youthful god with Fertility goddess. Ugric
(western Siberian). A green or red skin, decked with ornaments and
goddess concerned with childbirth and the future flowers, armed with a
bow of sugar cane, strung

[]{#index_split_003.html#p170}**Kamini** 155

with a line of honey bees, and arrows tipped with MAHAVIDYAS or
personifications of the SAKTI of a flower. He may be three-eyed and
three-headed SˇIVA, representing MAHARATRI.

and frequently rides on a parrot.

The consorts of Kamadeva are the goddesses Rati and PRITI. Legend
accounts that Kamadeva **Kamalasana**

met his death at the hands of SˇIVA, who inciner-God. Hindu (Puranic).
An epithet of BRAHMA.

ated him with flames from his middle eye.

One of the classic depictions in Hindu art Kamadeva had inadvertently
wounded the medi-wherein Brahma is drawn seated on a lotus, which tating
god with one of his shafts of desire and had blossoms from the navel of
VISŇU.

caused him to fall in love with PARVATI. The epithet Ananga (bodiless)
is applied to Kamadeva in this context. Kamadeva is reincarnated as
Kama, **Kamantakamurti**

who in turn is reincarnated as PRADYUMNA, the Minor god. Hindu
(Puranic). A violent aspect son of Krsna. The god is invoked
particularly of SˇIVA in which he is depicted immolating when a
bride-to-be departs from her family Kama, the god of sexual love, using
a blast of home.

fire from his third eye. The reason given for this assault is that Kama
had interrupted the ascetic meditation of Sˇiva by making him
**Kamado-No-Kami**

desirous of PARVATI.

Household god. Shinto \[Japan\]. Specifically the *kami* responsible for
the cooking stove.

**Kami**

Generic name for a deity. Shinto \[Japan\]. The **Kama-Gami**

title applied to the gods and goddesses of God of potters. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Each kiln has a Shintoism.

small stone statue of the deity standing upon it to which the potters
offer sake and salt before lighting the fire. Also Kamadokami.

**Kami-Musubi-No-Kami**

*(divine produc-*

*ing wondrous deity)*

Creator being. Shinto \[Japan\]. The third in the **Kamaksi**

*(of amorous appearance)*

list of primordial deities appearing in the *Kojiki* Goddess. Dravidian
(Tamil) \[southern India and and *Nihongi* sacred texts. A remote and
vaguely Sri Lanka\]. A SAKTI of SˇIVA recognized locally defined deity
who was born alone in the cosmos at Kanchipuram, but also in her own
right at and whose presence remains hidden from several places in
southern India. Also Kamatchi mankind. Probably influenced by Chinese
reli-

(Tamil).

gion.

**Kamala**

*(lotus-born)*

**Kamini**

*(loving woman)*

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Particularly Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An worshiped in southern India. One of a group of attendant
of BUDDHAKAPALA.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p171}156 **Kamo-Wake-Ikazuchi**
**Kamo-Wake-Ikazuchi**

osis of the sacred river Oubangui. The mother of Rain god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of many rain the creator god TORO.

KAMIS invoked in Shintoism and included in a generic grouping of RAIJIN,
deities of thunder, storm and rain.

**Kankala(murti)**

Minor god. A violent and heavily armed aspect of SˇIVA. Traditionally
accompanied in artworks **Kamrusepa**

by a skeleton, Kankala takes his place in mythol-Goddess of healing.
Hittite and Hurrian. Mother ogy as the representation of the deity who
slew of Aruna. Involved in the legend of TELEPINU, VISŇU'S bodyguard
VISVAKSENA. This was the "missing" vegetation fertility god.

prompted by the refusal of Visvaksena to permit Sˇiva an audience with
Visňu. These illustrations were designed by Saivites as part of a
propa-Kana-Yama-Biko-No-Kami

ganda exercise to demonstrate the superiority of God of miners. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Born from the Sˇiva over Visňu.

vomit of IZANAMI and worshiped in the Nangu-Jinja and other shrines. His
consort is KANA-YAMA-HIME-NO-KAMI. One of the KAMIS of the **Kankar
Mata**

so-called "metal mountain."

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A SAKTI who in later Hinduism
became regarded as a SAPTAMATARA (mother) of evil intent. Known
**Kana-Yama-Hime-No-Kami**

particularly from Bengal as a goddess who spreads Goddess of miners.
Shinto \[Japan\]. Born from disease.

the vomit of IZANAMI and worshiped in the Nangu-Jinja and other shrines.
Her consort is KANA-YAMA-BIKO-NO-KAMI. One of the KAMIS

**Kantatman**

of the so-called "metal mountain."

Obscure god of medicine. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The twentieth of the
thirty-nine minor *avataras* of the god VISŇU and possibly the same
**Kane**

as DHANVANTARI, as he is said to be a "carrier of God of light.
Polynesian \[Hawaii\]. A sky god nectar." By different genealogy he has
been comparable with the more widely known Polyne-equated with
PRADYUMNA, the god of love.

sian deity ATEA. Considered to be part of a primordial trinity with KU
(stability) and LONO

(sound).

**Kanti**

*(desire)*

*See also* TANE(MAHUTA).

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The SAKTI *of* NARAYANA.

**Kangalogba**

Primordial spirit. Pokot and Suk \[Uganda and **Kapali**

*(wearing skulls)*

western Kenya, East Africa\]. The female spirit God. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). One of the group personified in the dragonfly and also the
apothe-of eleven EKADASARUDRAS or forms of RUDRA.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p172}**Katajalina** 157

**Kapalini**

*(carrying a cup)*

**Karttikeya**

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-1. God. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). A form of dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

SKANDA who was reared by the Pleiades stars and is generally represented
therefore with six heads.

(In Hindu mythology there are only six Pleiades, **Karaikkal Ammaiyar**

not the seven recognized in modern astronomy.) Local mother goddess.
Hindu \[southern India\].

His SAKTI is KARTTIKI and his attendant animal is Known from the town of
Karikal as a deified asce-a peacock. Attributes: conch, hook, noose,
prayer tic who is depicted with an emaciated form.

wheel, shield, spear, staff, sword and wood apple.

Attribute: playing cymbals.

2\. God. Buddhist. Equating with the Hindu god Skanda. Color: red. Rides
upon a peacock. Attributes: cock, Sakti and staff.

**Karai-Shin**

God of lightning. Buddhist \[Japan\]. One of the **Karttiki**

deities grouped in Shintoism as the RAIJIN gods of Mother goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). One thunder, storm and rain.

of a group of nine NAVASAKTIS who, in southern India, rank higher than
the SAPTAMATARAS.

**Karini**

Inferior goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-Kasˇku

dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

Moon god. Pre-Hittite and Hittite. Known from inscriptions. Also KUSˇUH
(Hurrian).

**Karkota**

Snake god. Hindu. One of a group of seven **Kasyapa**

*(deriving from the Sanskrit for* MAHANAGAS. Color: black. Attributes:
rosary and

*"tortoise")*

waterjar. Three-eyed.

Primordial god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). In Vedic literature a divine
demiurge and father of mankind, snake demons, *DEVAS* etc. His name
**Karmavasita**

*(control of karman)*

stems, arguably, from the notion of the cosmos as Minor goddess.
Buddhist. One of a group of a giant tortoise. He has had thirteen
consorts. In twelve VASITAS or goddesses personifying the other texts he
is the father of the god NARADA disciplines of spiritual regeneration---
*karma*( *n*) who consorted with one of the daughters of is an act, rite
or deed originating in the hope DAKSA. Also PRAJAPATI.

of future recompense. Color: green. Attribute: a staff.

**Katajalina**

Animistic spirit. Australian aboriginal. Invoked at **Karta**

the ceremony of initiation by the Binbinga peo-Goddess of destiny.
Pre-Christian Latvian.

ple once living on the west side of the Gulf of Known only from folk
traditions.

Carpentaria. Katajalina is reputed to live in an

[]{#index_split_003.html#p173}158 **Kataragama** anthill and to carry
off the spirit of the young ini-MATARAS (mothers) of evil intent. Also
one of a tiate, kill him and then restore him to life as an group of
eight ASTAMATARAS *.* She embodies lack adult. His presence is announced
in the noise of of envy or, alternatively, delusion. Her animal is the
bull-roarer.

a peacock. Attributes: arrow, ax, bell, book, bow, cockerel, lotus,
spear, staff and waterjar.

**Kataragama**

Tutelary god. Tamil \[Sri Lanka\]. One of four **Kaumudi**

*(moonlight)*

great national deities and equating to the Hindu Goddess of the light of
the moon. Hindu. The god SKANDA. Also Ceyon.

consort of CANDRA.

**Katavul**

**Kavra'nna**

*(walking around woman)*

Supreme god. Tamil \[southern India and Sri Sun spirit. Chukchee
\[eastern Siberia\]. The con-Lanka\]. The ultimate creator of all that
exists in sort of the sun in Chukchee mythology. Also the world and the
judge of humanity able to Ko'rgina (rejoicing woman).

reward or punish at will.

**Kazyoba**

**Katyayani**

Sun god. Nyamwezi \[Tanzania, East Africa\].

Form of the goddess DURGA or PARVATI. Hindu Regarded as the tutelary
deity and creator of the (Puranic). Parvati, as the ascetic KALI,
possessed tribe.

a black skin. When SˇIVA ridiculed her she cast it off, and it was
subsequently filled "with the combined brilliance of the gods" to create
Katyayani.

**Keawe**

Her attendant animal is a lion or tiger.

Creator god. Hawaiian. An androgynous though apparently male principle
or monad, he lived once in the dark empty abyss of Po. There, **Kauket**

Keawe transformed primordial chaos into an Primordial goddess. Egyptian.
One of the eight orderly cosmos. He fashioned the sky from the deities
of the OGDOAD representing chaos, she is lid of his *calabash* (a
water-carrying gourd) and coupled with the god KEK and appears in
anthro-the sun from an orange disc formerly kept inside pomorphic form
but with the head of a snake.

the calabash.

The pair epitomize the primordial darkness. She Keawe's first son was
KANE, the god of light, is also depicted greeting the rising sun in the
guise and his daughter was Na Wahine, both created of a baboon.

through his own powers of conception. He subsequently entered into an
incestuous relationship with Na Wahine to father the chief **Kaumari**

pantheon of Hawaiian gods and goddesses, Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). The including most notably KU, LONO and Kanaloa, SAKTI of
SKANDA (Kaumara) who in later Hin-who became known, collectively, as the
tripar-duism became regarded as one of a group of seven tite god.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p174}**Khasa** 159

**Kebechet**

**Ketua**

Chthonic snake goddess. Egyptian. The daughter God of fortune. Ngbandi
\[Democratic Republic of ANUBIS who was involved in the cult of the of
Congo, central Africa\]. One of seven deities dead as the deity
responsible for libations. She is invoked at daybreak. He controls both
good luck depicted as a serpent.

and ill-fortune. According to tradition he has seven children: morning,
noon, evening, night, sun, moon and water. He accords to water the
**Kek**

privileges of a firstborn son.

Primordial god. Egyptian. One of the eight deities of the OGDOAD
representing chaos, he is coupled with the goddess KAUKET and appears in
**Khadir**

anthropomorphic form but with the head of a Vegetation god. Pre-Islamic
north African. He frog. The pair epitomize the primordial darkness.

wanders the earth returning to the same spot He is also depicted
greeting the rising sun in the once in every 500 years and is said to
have guise of a baboon.

gained his immortality by drinking from the well of life. Similar in
some respects to the Syrian god ADONIS and revered by Alexander the
**Kemosˇ**

Great. Normally referred to as *Al-Khidr* (the Tutelary god. Moabite
\[Jordan\]. Mentioned under green one).

the name of Chemosh in the *Vetus Testamentum:* 1

Kings 11.7. as being one of the gods worshiped by the Israelite king
Solomon. Eventually adopted **Khandoba**

by the Greeks and absorbed into the cult of ARES.

Form of the god SˇIVA. Hindu (late). Khandoba is believed to have
emerged as a deity with a distinct **Kere'tkun**

cultic following no earlier than the thirteenth or Sea spirit. Chukchee
\[eastern Siberia\]. The chief fourteenth century, mainly in western
India and being in the ocean depths, known to the mar-centered on
Jejuri, near Poona. The god is gen-itime Chukchee. His consort is
Cinei'nen. He erally regarded as one of several martial forms owns all
the creatures of the sea and is said to which Sˇiva took to combat
demons. His consort wear a cloak of walrus gut and to be extremely is
the goddess MHALSA, considered to be a form fierce. He feeds on the
bodies of drowned fisher-of PARVATI. He is depicted bearing four arms
and men and is the subject of sacrifice. Also Peruten.

is usually mounted on a horse, but may also be accompanied by a dog.
Attributes: bowl, drum, sword and trident. Also Makhari; Mallari;
Mart-Kesava *(long-haired)* land.

Minor *avatara* of VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). His SAKTI is KIRTI.

**Khasa** *(itch)*

Minor goddess. Hindu (Vedic). Daughter of **Kesini**

*(hairy)*

DAKSA, consort of KASYAPA and a deity control-Goddess. Buddhist. An
attendant of ARAPACANA.

ling spirits of forests.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p175}160 **Khasaparna** **Khasaparna**
*(gliding through the air)* ered with gold leaf and buried in stone
sarcophagi God. Buddhist. A variety of AVALOKITESVARA.

have been discovered. Khnum supervises the Color: white. Attributes:
image of AMITABHA on annual Nile flood, which is physically generated
the crown, and lotus.

by the god HAPY. His consort at Esna is the goddess Menhyt. Khnum is
also described at other sites as the *BA* or soul of various deities
including **Khen-Ma**

GEB and OSIRIS. Depicted anthropomorphically Goddess. Buddhist
\[Tibet\]. The female controller or with the head of a ram.

of the earth's demons, attended by a ram.

Attribute: a golden noose.

**Khon-Ma**

Chthonic goddess. Tibetan. Ruler of a horde **Khen-Pa**

of demons who live in the earth and who God. Buddhist \[Tibet\]. The
male counterpart of may infest houses. She is depicted typically
KHEN-MA, he controls the demons of heaven, wearing yellow robes and with
attributes includ-attended by a white dog. Attribute: a crystal staff.

ing a golden noose. Her vehicle is a ram. To guard against her
influence, a ram's skull is hung from the doorpost of a dwelling and
filled with **Kherty**

*(lower one)*

offerings.

Chthonic or earth god. Egyptian. Known from at least 2500 BC, Kherty
acts as a guardian of royal tombs but displays a more ominous aspect
threat-Khons(u) *(wanderer)*

ening the soul of the ruler. Pyramid Texts warn Moon god. Egyptian
(Upper). Recognized from that the king must be protected from Kherty by
at least 2500 BC but best known during the New the sun god RE. Depicted
anthropomorphically Kingdom (mid-sixteenth century BC). A signifi-or
with the head of a ram.

cant deity at Thebes, where he is described as an offspring of AMUN and
MUT. His sacred animal is the baboon. There is a Khonsu precinct as part
of **Khipa**

the Temple of Amun in the Karnak complex.

Tutelary deity. Hittite and Hurrian. This may be From the Greco-Roman
period there exists a an archaic name for the goddess MA. Also Khebe.

sanctuary of Kom-ombo where Khonsu is seen as the offspring of the
crocodile god SOBEK and the mother goddess HATHOR. Depicted
anthropo-Khnum

morphically or with a falcon's head, but in either Chthonic or earth
god. Egyptian (Upper). Said to case enveloped in a close-fitting robe.
He wears a create human life on a potter's wheel but strictly crown
consisting of a crescent moon subtending at the behest of creator
deities. He is usually a full moon orb.

seated before a potter's wheel on which stands a naked figure in the
process of molding. The Khnum cult was principally directed from
sanc-Khyung-Gai mGo-Can

tuaries at Esna, north of the first Nile cataract, Local god. Buddhist
\[Tibet\]. Equating to the and at Elephantine where mummified rams
cov-Hindu god GARUDA.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p176}**Klehanoai** 161

**Ki**

*(the great one)*

Probably equating with the Syrian ADONIS. Also Archetypal chthonic
principle. Mesopotamian Kinnur.

(Sumerian). According to some traditions, Ki is the daughter of ANSˇAR
and KISˇAR and consort of AN. As the cosmos came into being, An took the
**Kinyras**

role of god of heaven and Ki became the person-Local god of metalwork.
Greek. Known from ification of the earth and underworld. She is the
Cyprus as a magician and smith. Derived from an mother of the god of the
air, ENLIL, with whom older western Asiatic model.

`</i>`{=html}

*she descended from the heavens. Some authori-See also* KOTAR.

ties argue that she was never regarded as a deity.

There is no evidence of a cult and the name appears in a limited number
of Sumerian creation **Kirti** *(glory)*

texts. The name URASˇ (tilth) may relate.

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The SAKTI *See also* ANTU(M).

of KESAVA. Attribute: waterjar.

**Kianda**

**Kisˇar**

God of the sea. Kimbundu \[Angola, southern Primordial god(dess).
Mesopotamian (Sumerian Africa\]. Guardian of the Atlantic Ocean and and
Babylonian-Akkadian). The consort or equal its creatures. Invoked by
fishermen who place of ANSˇAR and mother or creator of AN and KI in
offerings on the shore. His presence may be the creation cosmos.

symbolized by a skull.

**Kitanitowit** *(good creator)* **Kibuka**

Creator god. Algonquin Indian \[eastern Canada\].

God of war. Buganda \[Uganda, East Africa\]. The The first being who is
present everywhere in the brother of the creator god MUKASA, said to
reside on universe. He is invisible and is represented dia-the island of
Sese. According to tradition, he secured grammatically by a point
surrounded by a circle victory in war for the Buganda by taking the form
of on which are marked the four quarters.

a cloud which hovered above their enemies and rained spears and arrows.
He apparently enjoyed a succession of temples in the past which housed
the **Kiya'rnarak** *(I exist)* hidden statue of the god and his sacred
shield.

Supreme being. Inuit. An indistinct and remote character, out of touch
with ordinary mortals, **Kini' je**

who created the world.

Sky spirit. Yukaghir (eastern Siberia\]. The being in charge of keeping
account of time. Also Ki'njen.

**Klehanoai** *(night-bearer)* Moon god. Navaho \[USA\]. According to
tradi-Kinnar *(divine lyre)* tion, he was created at the same primordial
time Musician god. Western Semitic. Mentioned in as the dawn, from a
crystal bordered with white Ugaritic texts and known from Phoenicia.

shells. His face is said to be covered with sheet

[]{#index_split_003.html#p177}162 **Klotho**

lightning and the sacred primeval waters. The as a woman's head adorned
with ears of corn.

moon disc is actually a shield behind which the She is integral to the
*Eleusinian Mysteries* in god moves invisibly across the night sky. He
is which she is abducted to Hades, resulting in the never impersonated
or depicted. Also Tlehanoai.

distress of her mother and the blighting of nature. At Samaria-Sebaste
in Syrio-Palestine, Kore was the only deity worshiped, apart from
**Klotho**

the emperor.

Goddess of spinning. Pre-Homeric Greek.

According to Hesiod, one of the daughters of ZEUS and THEMIS. An ancient
deity linked with **Korravai**

LACHESIS and ATROPOS as one of a trio of *MOIRAI* War goddess. Dravidian
(Tamil) \[southern India or Fates. She is depicted with a spindle.

and Sri Lanka\]. Worshiped in desert regions in southern India, thought
to live in trees and equating to DURGA. She has a son, MURUKAN. Also
**Kollapura-Mahalaksmi**

Katukilal; Korrawi.

Goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Six-armed. Attributes: club, shield and wine
glass.

**Kotar**

Blacksmith god. Western Semitic (Syrian). Iden-Kondos

tified in the Ugaritic (Ras Sˇamra) texts as building God of cereal
crops. Pre-Christian Finnish. Para palace for the god BAAL and forging
his weapons ticularly identified with the sowing of wheat.

for the conflict against the sea god YAMM. Known After Christianization,
he was absorbed by the also from Phoenician inscriptions. Also Kosˇar,
figure of St. Urban.

Chusor, KINYRAS.

**Kono-Hana-Sakuya-Hime-No-Kami** **Kotisri**

Mountain goddess. Shinto \[Japan\]. The deity Mother goddess. Buddhist.
The so-called "mother who guards the sacred Mount Fuji. A daughter of
7,000 *buddhas."*

of O-YAMA-TSU-MI and the consort of Prince NINIGI, her shrine is located
on the summit of the mountain. She is also closely associated
**Koto-Shiro-Nushi**

with Mount Asama about 80 kilometers to the God of luck. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Probably syncretized north.

early in Shintoism with the god EBISU.

**Kore**

*(the girl)*

**Kouretes**

Youthful goddess of the corn. Greek. The more Forest deities. Greek.
Known from Ephesus and generic name for the goddess PERSEPHONE.

other sites as the spirits of trees and streams, they Identified as the
daughter of DEMETER. She is are also perceived as nymphs who dance in
atten-the *spirit* of the corn as distinct from her mother dance on the
baby ZEUS. The term is also applied who is the *giver* of the corn.
Depicted on coinage to a bride or young woman.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p178}**KRSNA** 163

**Kourotrophos**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** generally throughout India, Obscure wet-nurse
goddess. Greek. Known only but particularly Mathura.

from ritual texts.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures generally bronze but also stone. Reliefs.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Mahabharata* epic, *Bhagavad-Koyote*

*Gita* and *Bhagavata-Purana.*

Tutelary god. North American Indian. Recognized by several tribes,
including the Navaho and Krsna is the eighth and arguably the most
impor-Apache. He acts as a cult hero who intercedes tant incarnation or
*avatara* of the god VISŇU. He with more remote creator spirits and
teaches the appears inauspiciously in the Vedic texts, but Indian.

grows in stature and popularity. Allegedly born at Mathura on the bank
of the river Yamuna, he is the son of VASUDEVA and DEVAKI, fostered by
**Kratos**

Nanda and Yasoda. He is a deity who epitomizes God of strength. Greek.
One of the sons of the human aspirations and shortcomings together.

goddess STYX and brother of BIA (force).

Thus he is both a Hindu divine hero, and a drinker and womanizer. He has
no legal consort but his chief mistress, a married woman, is **Kronos**

RADHA. He is reputed to have enjoyed as many as Archetypal fertility
god. Pre-Greek. He is of 16,000 such liaisons.

unknown origin but is the son of the earth mother Almost certainly,
Krsna originated as a fertil-GAIA and the sky god OURANOS, whom he ity
god of herdsmen and vegetation who became usurped after castrating him.
His consort is RHEA.

syncretized with the hero of the *Mahabharata* So as not to suffer a
similar fate to his father he epic. In the *Bhagavata-Purana*, Krsna is
also swallowed all his children except ZEUS who was perceived as the
embodiment of the cosmos---

kept from him by a ruse. Zeus eventually hurled the vault of heaven is
his navel, the stars his Kronos into Tartaros, the abyss in which all
the chest, the sky his eyes.

TITANS were confined. He was celebrated in the Krsna's incarnation was,
by tradition, Greek harvest festival of *kronia* which equalled designed
to save the world from the demonic the Roman *saturnalia*. During
Hellenic times he king Kansa. He is particularly worshiped as a was the
supreme god at Byblos \[Syria\]. He is baby (BALAKRSNA) and as a
youthful shepherd depicted on coinage of Antiochus IV (175-164

accompanied by Radha. He is seen as a skilled BC) nude, leaning on a
scepter, with three pairs of musician often depicted playing the flute
at the wings, two spread and one folded.

sound of which nature pauses to listen, storms are calmed, rivers flow
calmly and maidens are roused.

**KRSNA**

*(the dark one)*

The legends of Krsna's childhood depict him as **ORIGIN** Hindu (Epic
and Puranic) \[India\]. Incara somewhat precocious child who plays
tricks and nation of Visňu.

ransacks kitchen jars of butter and curds. The **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 300 BC or ear-incident with butter has been a popular
theme lier until present.

for sculptures. As an adult he champions the **SYNONYMS** Kannan
(Tamil). Many epithets.

struggle with the adversaries of mankind, the

[]{#index_split_003.html#p179}164 **Krsodari** *nagas,* subduing the
serpent KALIYA (see also **Kshumai**

GARUDA). He may be seen standing on Garuda.

Fertility goddess. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. A benefi-Color: black or dark
blue. Attributes: flute, the cent goddess appearing in the guise of a
goat.

hill of Govardhana on one finger, an ornament, Legend has it that either
she or her eldest daugh-prayer wheel and shepherd's staff. He may, on
ter is the mother of the god MON. She is said to occasion, carry other
objects.

have given mankind the boon of goats, grapes, other fruit and vegetation
in general. She was called upon in times of sickness. She is depicted in
**Krsodari** *(thin-waisted)* wooden statues with prominent long breasts
and Goddess. Hindu. An emaciated form of CAMUNDA, vulva. Also Kime.

a personification of famine. She stands upon a corpse. Attributes: club,
iron rod, skull and trident.

**Ksitigarbha**

*(womb of the earth)*

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Known exten-Krttika(s)

sively from northern India to China and Japan.

`</i>`{=html}

*Minor goddess(es) of fortune. Hindu (Epic and One of the group of
female *BODHISATTVAS* or Puranic). Strongly malevolent *NAKSATRA*( *S*)
con-buddha*-designates. Color: yellow or green. Attrib-sisting of the
six stars in the Pleiades constellation utes: book, bowl, jewel, staff
and water jar. In who become nurses of the god SKANDA. (In China she is
recognized as an underworld deity, Hindu mythology there are only six
Pleiades, not Di-zang. In Japan she becomes a guardian deity of the
seven recognized in modern astronomy.) passage, Jizo.

**Ksama** *(patience)*

**Ku**

Minor goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One Primordial being.
Polynesian \[Hawaii\]. An aspect of the daughters of DAKSA. Attribute:
trident.

of a tripartite deity which also includes KANE, the light, and LONO,
sound. They existed in chaos and darkness, which they broke into pieces
to **Ksantiparamita**

allow the light to come in.

Philosophical deity. Buddhist. One of the PARAMITAS. Spiritual offspring
of RATNASAMBHAVA.

Color: yellow. Attributes: jeweled banner and **KUAN TI**

white lotus.

**ORIGIN** Taoist (Chinese). God of war.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 300 until present.

**Ksetrapala**

**SYNONYMS** Guan Di; Kuan Kung.

God of passage. Hindu (Puranic). Form of the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
throughout China.

god BHAIRAVA specifically designated as a **ART REFERENCES** paintings
and sculpture.

guardian deity of doorways. Also regarded as a **LITERARY SOURCES**
various philosophical and tutelary deity in Saivite temples. Stands upon
religious texts, mostly inadequately researched a lotus and possesses a
number of attributes.

and untranslated.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p180}**Kubaba** 165

The most powerful figure in the pantheon, the probably of Indian origin.
Introduced into god is based on an historical figure who lived AD

China as a male deity until circa AD 600 when 162-220. He was a general
in the imperial army the transition to a goddess began; it was com-and
came to prominence after a successful battle pleted by circa AD 1100.
Although accepted into with the warlord Tung Cho. He was subsequently
Taoism, in contrast to all other Chinese deities, deified.

she is not provided with the normal offerings of The epitome of
austerity, loyalty and integrity, food and wine.

he is worshiped as the personification of the An alternative tradition
places her in a mortal sacred principles of the *hsieh* or knightly
warrior.

existence as the princess Miao Shan who He was the tutelary deity of the
Chung emperors committed suicide by strangling herself and was and is
the god of the military, but also of restau-subsequently taken by the
BUDDHA to an island, rants, pawn shops, curio dealers and literature.

P'u T'o, where she spent nine years perfecting He is a guardian of
secret societies, including Tri-herself.

ads, and brotherhoods, particularly in Hong Kuan Yin enjoys a major
popularity as a pure Kong, but also of the police, thus many CID

and benevolent spirit whose influence has offices possess an altar to
Kuan Ti, as Kuan Kung.

eclipsed that of the historical Buddha incarna-He is depicted seated on
a tiger skin, sometimes tion, SAKYAMUNI, in China. Her name is invoked
with the face of a tiger on the breast of his robe.

if danger threatens and she has strong fertility His magical sword is
the "black dragon" and his connotations---newly married couples pray to
her horse is the "red hare." His festivals are celebrated for children.

on the fifteenth day of the second moon and on the Several other Chinese
goddesses are consid-thirteenth day of the fifth moon. He thus presides
ered by some authors to be manifestations of over the light half of the
year---spring and summer.

Kuan Yin. She frequently shares sanctuaries with Images of Kuan Ti are
kept by most households the queen of heaven, TIN HAU, and has taken in
China, facing the entrance of the building, to over part of her area of
influence. She is thus frighten away evil influences.

titled Goddess of the Southern Sea, which is technically an accolade due
to Tin Hau.

Kuan Yin is depicted seated upon a lotus with **KUAN YIN** *(hearer of
cries)* attributes including a vase filled with the dew of **ORIGIN**
Taoist (Chinese). Benign guardian goddess.

compassion and a willow branch. Her attendant **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 100, though Lung Nu may stand behind her with other
in various forms, until present.

objects, including a peacock-like bird, pearls and **SYNONYMS** Guan
Yin; KWANNON (Japanese).

a rosary.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout Chinese culture.

**ART REFERENCES** paintings and sculptures.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Various philosophical and **Kubaba**

religious texts, mostly inadequately researched Mother goddess.
Anatolian and northern Syrian.

and untranslated.

She was worshiped particularly at Carchemish and seems to equate with
the Hittite goddess An essentially foreign deity, derived from the
SˇAUSˇKA. Attributes include pomegranate and mir-Buddhist god
AVALOKITESVARA, and therefore ror. Also Gubaba, Kupapa.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p181}166 **Kubera**

**Kubera**

*(misshapen)*

**Kuju**

1\. God of riches. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic).

Sky spirit. Yukaghir \[eastern Siberia\]. A benevo-He was originally the
head of the *YAKSAS* spirits of lent being who supplies mankind with
food.

the forests, but by Puranic times was associated When fish appear in
great numbers in the lakes, with wealth and productivity. He is also a
*dikpala* they are thought to have fallen from the sky.

guardian of the northern quarter. The son of Pulastya and Idavida, his
consorts include Yaksi, VASUDHARA and Vriddhi. Identified with the city
of **Kuku-Ki-Waka-Muro-Tsuna-Ne-No-Alaka. He is depicted as a dwarfish
figure riding **Kami****

upon a Brahman or a chariot. Color: white. Attrib-Guardian deity. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The god who utes: generally carrying a purse, but
occasionally guards the house and its environs as a whole.

with various other items. Also Kuvera, Kauveri.

`</b>`{=html}

**2. God of riches. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a group of
DHARMAPALA with terrible appear-Kukulcan**

ance and royal attire. Also a *dikpala* or guardian of Creator god.
Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) the northern quarter. Color: yellow.
Attributes: ax,

\[Mexico\]. Kukulcan is, in origin, a Toltec god who banner, club, cup,
hook, Ichneumon disgorging was adopted by the Mayan culture and who
corre-jewels, noose, reliquary and occasionally a trident.

sponds closely with the Aztec deity QUETZALCOATL. He is chiefly
concerned with reincarnation, but is also responsible for the elements
of fire, **Kubjika**

*(hump-back)*

earth and water. He is depicted with various attrib-Goddess of writing.
Hindu. Personification of the utes, including a torch or a lizard
representing fire, thirty-two Tantric syllables.

maize for earth, and a fish for water. Also God B.

**Kubuddhi** *(stupid)*

**Kuku-Toshi-No-Kami**

Minor goddess. Hindu. One of the consorts of God of grain. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The deity respon-GANESA.

sible for the harvest of full-grown rice. His shrines are often serviced
by Buddhist priests.

**Kucumatz**

Supreme god. Mayan (Quiche Indian, classical **Kuladevata** *(family
god)* Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. An androgynous being Generic name of a
household god. Hindu. The who created all things out of itself.
Comparable god is chosen by a family to be their guardian with KUKULCAN.

deity and they all assemble at his temple, as and when necessary, for
worship. Also Kulanayaka.

**Kuei Shing**

God of literature. Chinese. Believed to reside **Kuladevi**

in the star constellation of Ursa Major. Also Goddess. Hindu. The female
equivalent of a Zhong-Kui.

KULADEVATA.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p182}**Kun-Rig** 167

**Kulika** *(of good family)* form the earth. He added animals and
plants, but Snake god. Hindu. One of a group of seven finally became
tired and went to sleep in a hole at MAHANAGAS. Attributes: rosary and
water jar.

the bottom of the lake, which he dug using a hill Three-eyed.

as a shovel.

**Kulisankusa** *(having an ax and a goad)* **Kunado-No-Kami**

Goddess of learning. Jain \[India\]. One of sixteen Guardian deity.
Shinto \[Japan\]. One of three VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess
SARASVATI.

KAMIS particularly concerned with the protection of roads and
crossroads. They also guard the boundaries of the house and the ways
lead-Kulisesvari *(lady of the ax)* ing to it. They may be known as
Yakushin Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Often depicted deities who
protect against plague. Generally with a corpse. Color: white.
Attribute: a staff.

identified as MICHI-NO-KAMI or Chiburi-No-Kami.

**Kulla**

God of builders. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and **Kundalini**

Babylonian-Akkadian). The god responsible for Mother goddess. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) the creation of bricks.

\[Mexico\]. The spirit of the earth perceived in human form and
responsible for the provision of all food from the soil. The earth is
considered to **Kumari** *(virgin)*

be sacred and should not be owned by any one Goddess. Hindu. Generally
recognized to be an epithet of D

person, but can be utilized for the benefit of the URGA. Worshiped at a
famous temple on the southernmost tip of India at Cape community as a
whole. Kundalini is believed to Comorin. Also known in Nepal, where a
have been the mother of all other vegetation small girl provides an
earthly incarnation of deities.

the goddess.

**Ku'nkunxuliga**

**Kumarbi**

Tribal god. Ma'malelegale Indian \[British Colum-Creator god. Hittite
and Hurrian. An antique bia, Canada\]. The personification of the
thundeity who was usurped by more "modern" gods.

derbird, known to many Indian tribes, who lives He is the father of
Ullikummi in Hittite legend.

in a palace in the upper world. The noise of the thunder is the beating
of its wings.

**Kumokums**

Creator god. Modoc Indian \[Oregon, USA\]. He **Kun-Rig**

*(knowing all)*

sat beside Tule Lake, which was all that existed, God. Buddhist
\[Tibet\]. Four-headed form of and created the world by scooping out mud
to VAIROCANA. Attribute: prayer wheel.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p183}168 **Kuntu bXan Po** **Kuntu bXan Po**

**Kus**

Head of pantheon. Bon (pre-Lamaist) \[Tibet\].

God of herdsmen. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and The chief god in the Bon
pantheon, he engen-Babylonian-Akkadian). Identified in the *Theogony*
dered the world from a handful of mud scraped *of Dunnu.*

from the primeval waters and created all living things from an egg.

**Kushi-Dama-Nigi-Haya-Hi**

*(soft fast sun)*

Sun god. Shinto \[Japan\]. The apotheosis of the **Kura-Okami-No-Kami**
*(great producer of* morning sun sent down by the sun goddess AMAT-rain
on the heights)

ERASU before Prince NINIGI appeared on earth.

Rain god. Shinto \[Japan\]. Known alternatively as the "dark rain god,"
he may also generate snow falls.

**Kushi-Iwa-Mado-No-Mikoto**

Guardian deity. Shinto \[Japan\]. The god who **Kurdaligon**

protects entrance gates.

God of smiths. Ossetian \[Caucasus\]. He assists the passage of dead
souls by attending to their horses' shoes.

**Kusˇuh**

Moon god. Hittite and Hurrian \[Anatolia\]. Also KASˇKU.

**Kurma(vatara)**

Incarnation of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The second
*avatara* of Visňu, Kurma **Kutji**

appears in the form of a tortoise which acts as a Animistic spirits.
Australian aboriginal. Malevo-pivot for the mountainous churning rod the
gods lent beings who conceal themselves in under-employ to make ambrosia
from the primal sea of growth and rock crevices and manifest as animals
milk after the flood. Kurma is depicted with a and birds, including
eagles, crows, owls, kangaroos human torso surmounting a tortoise shell.
Visňu is and emus. Kutji are considered to have taken over said to have
appeared in this form in order to wild creatures if their behavior
assumes unfamiliar recover some of the possessions lost during the
del-patterns. Only *shamans* may contain the influence uge. Attributes:
club, conch, lotus and prayer wheel.

of these spirits. Otherwise, they possess the poten-Also the name for a
vehicle of various deities.

tial to inflict disease and death on to human beings.

**Kurukulla**

**Kutkhu**

1\. Goddess of boats. Hindu. A Tantric deity gen-Guardian spirit.
Kemchadal \[southeastern erally depicted in a boat made of jewels. Also
god-Siberia\]. The counterpart of the Koryak dess of wine.

QUIKINN.A'QU, he fashioned the created world 2. Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). The SAKTI of into its present form and is the majordomo of
the AMITABHA. Usually of terrifying appearance.

creator god. His consort is Ilkxum and his sister Attributes: arrow,
bow, flower, hook, noose, is Xutlizic. His children include SI'MSKALIN,
rosary and trident.

TI'ZIL-KUTKHU and SI'DUKU. In mythology he is

[]{#index_split_003.html#p184}**Kyumbe** 169

depicted as a salacious character. Also Kutq; **SYNONYMS** CYBELE
(Roman); Kybebe.

Kutkinnaqu.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Pessinus (Asia Minor) and Rome, but also
extensively elsewhere.

**ART REFERENCES** black obelisk (lost); many clas-Ku'urkil

sical sculptures; a dish from Parabiago (in The founder of the world.
Chukchee \[eastern Milan); possibly the subject of a well-known
Siberia\]. Not only a deity, but a powerful *shaman* seal from Knossos.

and the first human. He equates with the Koryak **LITERARY SOURCES**
votive inscriptions, etc.

deity QUIKINN.A'QU.

One of the most important of the Asian mother goddesses. She probably
originates as a mountain **Kvasir**

goddess who became closely equated with the Minor god of wisdom. Nordic
(Icelandic). By tra-Greek mother goddesses RHEA and DEMETER.

dition he was created from the saliva of the AESIR

According to legend, the Greek god ZEUS raped and VANIR deities, who
thus combined their her and she bore a monstrous son Agdistis. Her
knowledge into a single being. He was slain by consort is ATTIS, whom
she discovered to be dwarfs who concocted a fermented drink from
unfaithful. In remorse, he castrated himself under his blood, mixed with
honey, and this mead a pine tree and bled to death.

became the inspiration of poets. He is also iden-In circa 204 BC the
black stone by which she was tified in Welsh mythology.

personified in Pessinus (Phrygia) was carried to Rome and installed in
the Temple of Victories on the Palatine as Cybele Magna Mater. This
fulfilled **Kwannon**

a prophecy that if the "great mother" was brought Form of
AVALOKITESVARA. Buddhist \[Japan\].

to Rome, the war with the invader Hannibal would *See also* KUAN YIN.

be won. She is often depicted riding in a chariot drawn by panthers or
lions and is accompanied by frenzied dancers or Korybantes. She was
invoked **Kwoth**

in the three-day festival commencing with mourn-Creator god. Nuer
\[Sudan\]. The Nuer people ing ( *tristia*) followed by joy ( *hilaria*)
in the spring have been affected by the expansion of Islam, and during
which her emasculated priests, the *galloi*, probably by Christianity,
and recognize a gashed themselves with knives. Attributes include
supreme deity, or spiritual being, responsible for key, mirror and
pomegranate.

all creation. One of his epithets is Tutgar, meaning "strong and without
limit."

**Kyumbe**

Creator god. Zaramo \[Tanzania, East Africa\].

**KYBELE**

Tradition has it that the earth and sky may have **ORIGIN** Phrygian
\[northwestern Turkey\]. Mother been present before this being emerged.
He is, goddess.

however, perceived as having engendered all liv-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 1500 BC and ing things on earth. He first created animals'
bod-probably much earlier in prehistory, until ies without tails. When
they had their legs fitted, Christianization (circa AD 400).

Kyumbe added tails as an afterthought.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p185}L

6

**Lachesis**

**Lahar**

Goddess of lot-casting. Pre-Homeric Greek.

God of cattle. Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

According to Hesiod one of the daughters of According to legend, he was
sent to earth by the ZEUS and THEMIS. One of an ancient trio gods ENLIL
and ENKI, to work in conjunction of MOIRAI with KLOTHO and ATROPOS, she
sus-with the grain goddess ASŇAN. In iconography tains the thread of
life and is depicted carrying he usually has ears of corn sprouting from
his a scroll.

shoulders. He may also carry a bow and club and is often depicted with a
ram at his feet.

**Lactanus**

**Lahmu**

Minor god of agriculture. Roman. Said to make Primordial deity.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-the crops "yield milk" or thrive.

Akkadian). Known from the Babylonian creation epic *Enuma Elisˇ* as one
of a pair who were created by TIAMAT from the primeval ocean and who, it
**Laghusyamala** *(lightly dark colored)* is suggested, were represented
by the silt of the Minor goddess. Hindu (Puranic). Attributes: lute
sea-bed. Lahmu and LAHAMU in turn created and wine glass.

ANSˇAR and KISˇAR, who created ANU.

**Lahamu**

**Laima**

Primordial deity. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Goddess of fate.
Pre-Christian Latvian. Particularly concerned with guarding women at
child-Akkadian). Known from the Babylonian birth, and with the newborn.
Regarded as a creation epic *Enuma Elisˇ* as one of a pair who household
goddess of prosperity and good fortune.

were created by TIAMAT from the primeval ocean and who, it is suggested,
were represented by the silt of the sea-bed. Lahamu and **Laka**

LAHMU in turn created ANSˇAR and KISˇAR, who Goddess of dancing.
Polynesian \[Hawaii\]. A created ANU.

minor deity who is nonetheless greatly revered by 170

[]{#index_split_003.html#p186}**Lan Cai-he** 171

islanders in a hedonistic cult of song, dance and dreams. She emerges in
many guises, changing sexual liberality.

form as Visňu changes his own incarnations. She is perceived also to
emerge as the black-skinned and destructive KALI. Many attributes, but
most **Laksmana** *(with auspicious marks)* commonly a lotus.

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A half- or Laksmi embodies the model
Hindu wife, faith-younger brother of the god RAMA. The son of ful and
subservient. She may be depicted on the Dasaratha and Sumitra, his
consort is Urmita. He knee of Visňu's *avatara* NARAYANA as Laksmi-often
stands to the left of Rama and may be Narayana. She is reincarnated with
each of his depicted holding a bow (see also SATRUGHNA).

other avatars---thus beside RAMA she becomes Color: golden. Attributes:
bow and ornaments.

Sita, said to have been born from a furrow, and with KRSNA she is first
RADHA, then RUKMINI.

She is worshiped particularly at the start of the **LAKSMI**

business year in India. In the *Divali* (Feast of **ORIGIN** Hindu (Epic
and Puranic) \[India\]. Con-Lamps) on the last day of the dark lunar
period sort of Visňu.

toward the end of October or early in November, **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 300 BC and every household lights a lamp in honor of
Laksmi.

earlier, through to present times.

She is also propitiated by gambling.

**SYNONYMS** Sri-Laksmi; Sri-Devi; DHARANI (earth); see also SITA.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** no temples, but revered gen-Lalaia'il

erally throughout India.

God of *shamans*. Bella Coola Indian \[British **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally bronze but Columbia, Canada\]. The deity who
initiates into also stone. Reliefs.

the shamanistic circle. He lives in the forest and **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Ramayana* and *Mahabharata* carries a wooden wand bound with cedar bark
epics; Puranic literature.

which he waves, creating a singing noise. He also frequents woodland
lakes and ponds. When a A major Hindu goddess who originated perhaps
woman meets him she is said to menstruate, while as a mother goddess but
who now represents a man develops a nose bleed. Also Kle-klati-e'il.

wealth and prosperity and epitomizes the later Hindu (Brahmanical)
notion of the active female principle or SAKTI in a male deity.
According to **Lamaria**

the *Ramayana*, she arose from the primal Hindu Tutelary goddess. Svan
\[Caucasus\]. Particularly sea of milk. Identified as the consort of
VISŇU

invoked by women as a hearth goddess and pro-from circa AD 400 onward,
she is generally tector of cows. Her name may have been derived depicted
as a beautiful golden-skinned woman under Christian influence.

possessing four, or more commonly two, arms.

She stands or rests on a lotus which may be watered by two attendant
elephants. Another **Lan Cai-he**

favored portrait finds her washing Visňu's feet as Immortal being.
Taoist (Chinese). One of the he reclines on the thousand-headed serpent

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, the deity Sesha, an action which
is said to bring Visňu is of ambiguous sex, sometimes depicted as a
girl.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p187}172 **Lao-Tsze** Once a mortal being who
achieved immortality **Larunda**

through perfect lifestyle. Attributes include flow-Chthonic goddess.
Sabine. An early Italic earth ers and a flute.

mother who, in Roman times, according to some *See also* BA XIAN.

traditions, became the mother of the LARES. Also Lara (Roman).

**Lao-Tsze**

God. Taoist (Chinese). Also known as the Most **Lasya** *(dancing girl)*
High Prince Lao, he is one of the three holy San Mother goddess.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One Ch'ing whose images stand in a Taoist
sanctuary.

of the group of ASTAMATARAS (mothers). She is The tutelary god of
alchemists. He is the founder generally depicted dancing the lasya
dance.

of Taoism who, according to tradition was born Color: white. Attribute:
a mirror. Also the generic with full command of speech, and with white
hair, name of a group of four goddesses, including under a plum tree.
His sacred animal is the water GITA, MALA, NRTYA and headed by LASYA.

buffalo.

**Latipan**

**Lar Familiaris**

Creator god. Canaanite.

Ancestral spirit. Roman. A personal and vaguely *See also* IL.

defined deity brought into the house from the surrounding land.

**Lau**

Spirit beings. Andaman Islands \[Sea of Bengal\].

Generally invisible but perceived in human **Lara**

See LARUNDA.

form and living in the jungles and the sea.

When an Andaman islander dies he or she becomes a *lau.*

**Laran**

God of war. Etruscan. Depicted as a youth armed with a lance and helmet
and dressed in a **Lauka Mate**

cape.

Goddess of agriculture. Pre-Christian Latvian.

Worshiped in the fields at ploughing time.

**Lares**

Hearth deities. Roman. The *lares* are a peculiarly **Laukika-Devatas**

Roman innovation. Two children, born of a liai-Generic name for a group
of deities. Hindu. Gods son between the god Mercury and a mute naiad,
known from local folklore as distinct from those Lara, whose tongue had
been cut out by Jupiter, of the Vedic texts.

became widely revered by Romans as house guardians. Iconographically
they are depicted in the guise of monkeys covered with dog skins with
**Laverna**

a barking dog at their feet.

Chthonic underworld goddess. Italic. Propitiated *See also* LARUNDA,
MERCURIUS.

by libations poured with the left hand.

[]{#index_split_003.html#p188}**Lesa** 173

**LEBIEN-POGIL** *(owner of the earth)* **Lelwani**

**ORIGIN** Yukaghir \[southeastern Siberia\]. Ani-Chthonic underworld
goddess. Hittite and Hur-mistic "owner" spirit.

rian. Associated with charnel houses and probably **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** prehistoric times modeled on the Sumerian ERESˇKIGAL.

until early twentieth century.

**SYNONYMS** none known.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** no fixed sanctuaries known.

**Lendix-Tcux**

**ART REFERENCES** none known, but possibly the Tutelary god. Chilcotin
Indian \[British Columbia, subject of anonymous wood carvings.

Canada\]. The so-called transformer known by **LITERARY SOURCES** *The
Yukaghir* (Jochelson).

different names among many Indian tribes. He is a wanderer who can
change shape from human to The chief protector of the earth. His
subordi-animal and who educates the human race. He nates are
YOBIN-POGIL, the owner of the forest; often appears in the guise of a
raven, or as a dog, the owner of fire LO'CIN-PO'GIL; the various and has
three sons.

protectors and keepers of animals (mo'yepul) and individual or group
protectors (PEJU'LPE).

The Yukaghir, as a hunting people, maintained a **LENUS**

delicate and sensitive relationship with these **ORGIN**

Celtic (Continental European). God of owners.

healing.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times until Christianization
circa AD 400.

**Legba**

**SYNONYMS** Iovantucarus; Lenus Mars (Romano-God of fate. Fon \[Benin,
West Africa\]. The Celtic).

youngest son of the supreme god LISA and his **CENTER(S) OF CULT** left
bank of the Moselle consort, the moon goddess MAWU. He is also opposite
Trier; also at Chedworth (England) regarded as a messenger god, moving
between and Caerwent (Wales).

Lisa and mankind on earth.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures, stone reliefs, votive plaques.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Romano-Celtic inscriptions.

**Lei Kung**

A god of healing worshiped by the Celtic tribe of God of thunder. Taoist
(Chinese). He heads the Treveri but later adopted by the Romans. The
deities of the pantheon who are responsible for Trier sanctuary was a
place of pilgrimage where storm, wind and rain and is usually
accompanied large numbers of offerings were deposited, and by YU SHIH,
the god of rain. He appears in carvings suggest that child patients were
often anthropomorphic form from about the beginning present. Lenus's
sanctuaries were usually associ-of the Christian era, depicted as a
strong, youth-ated with springs and some, if not all, had an *aba-ful
figure holding hammer and chisel. In drama *ton* or room for
recuperation.*

his movements are punctuated by rumblings on strings and drums. Circa AD
1000 he becomes depicted as a bird-like being with a monkey face.

**Lesa**

The transition was probably influenced by the Creator god. southeastern
African. The name popularity of the Hindu god GARUDA.

by which the supreme deity is known across a

[]{#index_split_003.html#p189}174 **LETO**

wide area of Zambia and Zimbabwe. Equating to the wrath of Athamas, King
of Thebes. The gods LISA in regions of West Africa. Also regarded as
elevated her to the status of goddess and her son a rain god. Probably
strongly influenced by became the god PALAEMON.

Islam and, to a lesser extent, by Christianity.

Also Leza.

**Lha**

Generic term for a deity. Buddhist-Lamaist **LETO**

\[Tibet\]. Also the title for a deity in the old Bon **ORIGIN** Greek.
Mother goddess.

pantheon, equating to the Sanskrit term *DEVA.*

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 800 BC but probably earlier through to
Christianization (circa AD 400).

**Lha-Mo** *(the goddess)* **SYNONYMS** Lato (Dorian); Latona (Roman).

Goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. Coming **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Lycia
and Phaistos, Crete.

from the old Bon pantheon and equating with **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and carvings.

the Hindu goddess SRIDEVI.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Iliad* (Homer); *Theogony* (Hesiod).

**Li Tie-guai**

The word "Leto" is a local term for *lady*. The Immortal being. Taoist
(Chinese). One of the Greek goddess probably derives from an earlier

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, he was western Asiatic model. She
is the daughter of the once a mortal being who achieved immortality
TITANS Koeos and Phoebe. Leto's main claim to through his lifestyle.

celebrity in Greek religion is that she was impreg-Attributes include a
bat, a gourd and an iron nated by ZEUS to become the mother of the
crutch.

deities ARTEMIS and APOLLO. She often tries to *See also* BA XIAN.

protect Artemis from the wrath of her stepmother, HERA. Also a guardian
goddess of graves.

A very early bronze image of her was discovered, **Lianja**

with those of Apollo and Artemis, at Dreros on God. Nkundo \[Democratic
Republic of Congo, Crete. In Lycia she was the principal goddess,
central Africa\]. He became the subject of an epic while at Phaistos she
was the center of an initia-known as *Nsongo and Lianja* and is regarded
today tion myth.

less as a god than a heroic figure, probably under the influence of
Christianity.

**Leukothea**

Sea goddess. Greco-Roman. Popular around the **Libanza**

coasts of the Mediterranean with fishing com-Creator god. Bangala
\[Democratic Republic of munities. A mermaid who was originally Ino, a
Congo, central Africa\]. One of a pair of mortal daughter of Kadmos. She
was wet nurse supreme deities with his sister/consort Nsongo.

to DIONYSOS (BACCHUS), but became mad and He lives at the bottom of the
river Congo, trav-threw herself in the sea with her son Melikertes.

eling the waterways and bringing floods as pun-In another version of the
story she was escaping ishment as well as to generate prosperity. He is

[]{#index_split_003.html#p190}**Liu Pei** 175

regarded as being generally benevolent. Also **Lilith**

Ibanza.

Goddess of desolation. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). She is perceived as a
demonic figure who, in the epic legend of *Gilgamesˇ and the Huluppu
Tree* **Liber**

takes up residence in INANA'S holy tree growing Chthonic fertility god.
Italic. Originally associon the banks of the Euphrates in Unug. When
ated with husbandry and crops but then assimi-the hero Gilgamesˇattacks
Lilith she escapes into lated with DIONYSOS. The consort of CERES and
the desert wastes.

father of the goddess LIBERA. His festival, the *Liberalia,* was on
March 17 when young men celebrated the arrival of manhood.

**Liluri**

Mountain goddess. Western Semitic (Syrian).

**Libera**

The consort of the weather god Manuzi, her Chthonic goddess. Italic. The
daughter of L

sacred animal is the bull.

IBER

and CERES.

**Linga**

**Liberalitas**

Symbol representing a god. Hindu. The phallic Minor god. Roman. Spirit
of generosity, employed form of SˇIVA.

`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_004.html}

as a propaganda vehicle by the emperors. Worshiped particularly from the
second century BC.

**Lir**

God. Celtic (Irish). The father of the sea god **Libertas**

MANANNAN, the consort of Aobh and later of her Minor god(dess). Roman.
Deity of constitutional sister Aoife. He had four children by Aobh: AED,
government and the notion of freedom, known Conn, Fiachra and Fionnuala.
Out of jealousy particularly from the second century BC. Attrib-Aoife
turned the four into swans and set father utes include the scepter,
lance and a special hat, and children against one another.

the *pileus,* which emancipated slaves were permitted to wear as a sign
of their liberation.

**Lisa**

**Líbitina**

Creator god. Fon and others \[Benin, West Chthonic goddess of death.
Roman. Associated Africa\]. Probably the equivalent of LESA in parts
with funerals and interment.

of East Africa. The supreme deity, whose more or less monotheistic role
may have been influenced by the spread of Islam and Christianity.

**Lietna'irgin** *(genuine dawn)* Spirit of the dawn. Chukchee \[eastern
Siberia\].

One of four beings concerned with the dawn in **Liu Pei**

different directions.

God. Taoist (Chinese). The third member of a *See also* TNE'SGAN,
MRATNA'IRGIN and NA'-

trio of deities with KUAN TI and CHANG FEI. He CHITNA'IRGIN.

is the embodiment of the imperial ideal and he

[]{#index_split_004.html#p191}176 **Llew Llaw Gyffes** carries the seal
of heaven's authority. He is con-Lodur

sidered to be humane and moderate. In art he Creator god. Germanic.
Mentioned in passing in usually takes a central position between Chang
the creation mythology as being one of a trio of Fei on his left and
Kuan Ti on his right.

deities, with Odin and HOENIR, who engendered mankind.

*See also* OTHIN.

**Llew Llaw Gyffes**

God. Celtic (Welsh). The counterpart of the Irish god L

**Logos**

UG. The son of ARIANRHOD, he was raised by G

Primordial spirit of reason. Greek. A concept pro-WYDION. The heroic
figure of Lancelot may be derived from him.

moted by the Stoics, who perceived Logos as the mind of JUPITER, but
more generally recognized as the divine essence from which all deities
arise.

**Loa**

Philo of Alexandria apportioned human charac-Spirit beings. Puerto Rico
and Haiti. The gods of teristics to Logos. The Gnostic Christian,
Valenti-the voodoo cult who were originally imported by nus, identified
Logos as the word coming from the slaves from West Africa. An amount of
Christian mind of the father. The Christian father Clement influence is
present in their makeup.

of Alexandria claimed it to be the first principle of the universe,
while Origen perceived it as the principle embodied in the flesh by
Jesus Christ.

**Loba**

Sun god. Duala \[Cameroon, West Africa\]. Local **Lokapala**
*(protectors of the world)* people pray to this deity after sunset to
ensure Guardians of the four directions. Hindu and that he will appear
again the following morning.

Buddhist. Often placed in pairs at the entrance to tombs.

**Locana** *(the eye)*

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). The SAKTI of a **Lokesvara** *(lord of the
world)* *DHYANIBUDDHA* (spiritual meditation *buddha*) *,* Generic name
for a group of deities. Buddhist.

generally AKSOBHYA or VAIROCANA. Color: blue These are thought to be a
syncretization of Hindu or white. Attributes: cup, prayer wheel and
lotus and Buddhist deities and include such gods as with one or more
staves. Also BUDDHALOCANA.

SˇIVA, VISŇU and others which have come to be defined as forms of a
primeval *buddha* or *DHYANIBUDDHA.* The *lokesvara* are usually
repre-Lo'cin-coro'mo

sented by a small figure, identified as ADIBUD-Hearth spirit. Yukaghir
\[southeastern Siberia\].

DHA or AMITABHA, which rests on the head of the The guardian of the
household who migrates main statue. Also a group name for the many with
the family. Also Lo'cil, Yegi'le.

forms of the Buddhist deity AVALOKITESVARA.

**Lo'cin-po'gil**

**LOKI**

Fire spirit. Yukaghir \[southeastern Siberia\]. One **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic). Ambivalent character of the "owners," the apotheosis of
fire.

well represented in mythology.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p192}**Lu Pan** 177

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa **Loko**

AD 700) until Christianization (circa AD 1100).

God of trees. Fon \[Benin, West Africa\]. The **SYNONYMS** Lopt.

brother of the hearth goddess AYABA. Invoked **CENTER(S) OF CULT** none
evidenced and proba-particularly by herbalists before obtaining medi-bly
Loki was not worshiped as the other Asgard cines from the bark and
leaves of forest trees.

deities.

**ART REFERENCES** probably the subject of anonymous carvings.

**Lomo**

**LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* Goddess of peace.
Ngbandi \[Democratic Repub-

(Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo).

lic of Congo, central Africa\]. One of seven deities invoked at sunrise
each day.

Loki is a mischievous, Machiavellian, humor-ous, sometimes sinister
character. Snorri describes him as being "pleasing and handsome **Lono**
*(sound)*

in appearance, evil in character, very capricious Primordial being.
Polynesian \[Hawaii\]. An aspect in behavior." He is the "poor relation"
among of a tripartite god which also includes KANE, the the gods who has
strong affinities with the light, and KU, stability. They first existed
in chaos giants, particularly at Ragnarok (doom) when and night which
they broke into pieces, allowing he steers their ship, and whose
loyalties are light to come in. Also Ono (Marquesas Islands).

always suspect. Said to be the son of the giant Farbauti. He is also a
scandal-monger. He was indirectly responsible for the death of BALDER

**Lothur**

(directly so according to Snorri) and fought God of physical senses.
Nordic (Icelandic).

with HEIMDALL. Sometimes he appears as a According to a brief mention in
the *Voluspa* hero rescuing gods from various predicaments (Poetic Edda)
the god concerned with physical through cunning. He also stands for
evil, being i.e. sight, hearing and speech. According to though less
often, and was compared strongly some authors he may be a hypostasis of
the god by Christian times with the Devil. Able to OTHIN. Lothur is also
known in northern Ger-change shape at will---said at various times to
manic tradition. Also LODUR.

have impersonated a mare, flea, fly, falcon, seal and an old crone. As a
mare he gave birth to OTHIN'S horse Sleipnir and he also allegedly **Lu
Dong-bin**

sired the world serpent, the mistress of the Immortal being. Taoist
(Chinese). One of the netherworld, Hel, and the wolf Fenrir which

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, he was once will devour the sun
at Ragnarok.

a mortal being who achieved immortality through One of his prominent
attributes, said to his lifestyle. The tutelary god of barbers.
Attributes come from antiquity, is that of accomplished include a sword
with which he conquers demons.

`</i>`{=html}

*thief, stealing at various times FREYJA'S neck-See also* BA XIAN.

lace, THOR'S belt and iron gloves, and the apples of youth. There is
little to support the notion of Loki (Wagnerian: Loge) as a **Lu Pan**

fire god other than similarity of name--- *logi*, God of artisans.
Chinese. The deity concerned meaning fire.

with builders, bricklayers, housepainters and

[]{#index_split_004.html#p193}178 **Lubanga** carpenters. He is
particularly revered in Hong **CENTER(S) OF**

**CULT** Lugudunum (modern

Kong. According to tradition he was born in 606

Lyons) and elsewhere in Continental Europe; BC in the kingdom of Lu,
where he became a possibly brought to Ireland in the first century
skilled carpenter. He turned into a recluse on BC by settlers from Gaul.

the Li Shan mountain, where he perfected his **ART REFERENCES** various
stone carvings.

skills. He is said to have constructed the palace **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions; Cycles of Kings.*

of the queen of the western heaven. Because of his powers he was
murdered. He is also an The texts infer that Lug was a latecomer to the
invoker of harmonious relationships. His festival Irish pantheon, a
tribal god who was particularly takes place on the thirteenth day of the
sixth skilled in the use of a massive spear and a sling month, when the
rains are due. Attributes both of which possessed invincible magic
proper-include a set square and carpenter's plane. He is ties. One of
his epithets is *lamfhada---*"of the long also depicted with an ax, the
symbol of a mar-arm." A young and apparently more attractive riage
go-between.

deity than the DAGDA. The main festival in his honor seems to have been
*Lugnasad* on August 1, a particularly agrarian celebration in a country
which **Lubanga**

otherwise tended to observe pastoral calendar God of health. Bunyoro
\[Uganda, East Africa\].

dates, suggesting again that Lug was a later arrival He is invoked by
offerings of beer and his sanc-who possibly superseded an arcane tribal
god TRO-tuaries are surrounded by rows of trees.

GRAIN. An alternative name for the August festival was *Bron Trograin*
(Rage of Trograin). It is inferred that, like many Celtic deities, Lug
was capable of **Lubangala**

changing shape, hence the possible translation of Rainbow god. Bakongo
\[Democratic Republic of the name as lynx. There appear to be strong
Congo, central Africa\]. The chief adversary of the Romano-Celtic
associations in Continental storm god. He stills the thunder and makes
his Europe and Britain with place names such as appearance in the sky.
Considered to be the Lugudunum \[Lyons\] and Luguvalium \[Carlisle\].

guardian of the earth and sea, including the village and its community.

**Lugal-Irra**

Chthonic underworld god. Mesopotamian **Lucina**

(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Probably a Minor goddess of birth.
Roman. Concerned with minor variation of ERRA, the Babylonian plague
bringing the child into the light. Usually associ-god. The prefix Lugal
means "lord." Often cou-ated with CANDELIFERA and CARMENTES.

pled with MES LAM TAEA, god of war.

**LUG**

*(possibly lynx)*

**Lulal**

**ORIGIN** Celtic (Irish). Lord of skills.

God of uncertain status. Mesopotamian (Sumer-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
early times until ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Mentioned as
liv-Christianization circa AD 400 or later.

ing in Badtíbira in the Sumerian text *Descent of* **SYNONYMS** Lugh,
Lamfhada.

*Inana.* Also linked with a god Latarak.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p194}**Lupercus** 179

**Luna**

is perceived as a young and capricious girl, reflect-Moon goddess.
Roman. She derives from the ing the turbulent moods of the river. She
rules Greek model of SELENE, but is also comparable over the watermills.

with HEKATE. She enjoyed a major temple on the Aventine Hill in Rome.

**Lupercus**

God of wolves. Roman. Celebrated in the festival **Lunang**

of *Lupercalia* on February 15.

River goddess. Kafir \[Afghanistan---Hindukush\].

The patron goddess of the Prasun river, Lunang

[]{#index_split_004.html#p195}M

6

**Ma**

the complex of Karnak at Thebes. Maat is Fertility and vegetation
goddess. Cappadocian depicted either in human form wearing an ostrich
(Anatolia) \[Turkey\]. The tutelary goddess of Pon-plume on her head or
by an ostrich feather alone.

tic Comana, she was served by votary priestesses The rulers of Egypt
believed that they governed acting as sacred prostitutes, and biennial
festivals under her *aegis* and frequently had themselves were
celebrated in her honor. Gradually she took described as "beloved of
Maat." Maat was also on an added role as a warrior goddess with solar
integral to the success of a soul passing through connotations and
ultimately became syncretized the Hall of the Two Truths, where the
heart was with the Roman goddess BELLONA. On coins of weighed, to reach
paradise.

the Comana region she is depicted with the radiate head of a solar deity
carrying weapons and a shield.

**Mabon** *(son)*

God of youth. Celtic (Welsh). The son of an earthly mother, MODRON.
According to legend he **Ma Kiela**

was abducted when three days old. Also a god of Female spirit being.
Bakongo \[Democratic hunters and fishermen. He is known particularly
Republic of Congo, central Africa\]. The deified from northwestern
Britain and his cult extends head of a band of mortal women who died
specif-along the region of Hadrian's Wall. Known from ically from knife
wounds.

many Romano-Celtic inscriptions and syncretized with the Romano-Greek
god APOLLO.

**Maat**

Minor goddess of cosmic order. Egyptian. Epit-Macha

omizing the harmonious laws of the cosmic order.

Fertility goddess. Celtic (Irish). One of the aspects She is recognized
from the middle of the third of the MORRIGAN (a trio of warrior
goddesses with millennium, and probably earlier, closely associ-strong
sexual connotations), she appears as the ated with the creator deities
and particularly the consort of Nemed and of Crunnchu. She is also a sun
god. In later times she was described as the warrior goddess who
influences the outcome of

"daughter of Re." Her only known sanctuary is in battle by magical
devices. She can change shape 180

[]{#index_split_004.html#p196}**Maha-Ganapati** 181

from girl to hag and is generally dressed in red.

**Mahabala** ( *very strong*) She is depicted with red hair. She appears
thus to God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A fearsome emana-the Irish hero, Cu
Chulainn, before the Battle of tion of AMITABHA and a *dikpala*
(guardian) of the Moytura when she suddenly changes herself into
northwestern quarter. Color: red. Attributes: a crow, the harbinger of
death. Heads of slaugh-jewel, snakes, sword, tiger skin, trident and
white tered soldiers were fixed on the so-called Pole of fly whisk.
Three-headed.

Macha, and the ancient religious center of Emain Macha in Ulster is
named after her.

*See also* Banbha, E

**Mahabja**

RIU and Fodla.

Snake god. Hindu (Puranic). One of a group of seven MAHANAGAS.

**Madhukara** *(honey maker)* God. Buddhist. Derived from a Hindu deity
and equating with Kama. He rides in a chariot drawn **Mahacinatara**
*(Tara of Tibet)* by parrots. Color: white. Attributes: arrow,
ban-Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana) and Lamaist ner, bow and wine glass.

\[Tibet\]. An emanation of AKSOBHYA and, in Lamaism, a fearsome form of
the Vajrayana goddess, EKAJATA, who may be depicted with up to **Maeve**

twelve heads and twenty-four hands. She stands Mother goddess. Celtic
(Irish). The mythical upon a corpse. Attributes: arrow, ax, blue lotus,
Queen of Connaught. According to tradition her bow, cup, image of
Aksobhya on crown, knife, consort is Ailill and she represents the
"Sover-skull, snake, staff, sword, tiger skin and trident.

eignty of Ireland" at Connaught. She is thus the Three-eyed.

apotheosis of the land which is sacred.

**Mahadeva** *(mighty god)* **Mafdet**

God. Hindu (Puranic). An important epithet of Minor goddess. Egyptian.
She acts as a guardian SˇIVA with three heads (two male, one female)
against snakes and scorpions. She is depicted in signifying the three
aspects---Aghora (right), the form of a panther, often with the
instrument Saumya (center) and Sakti (left). Attributes: ax, of an
executioner.

bell, hook, mirror, noose, staff, sword, tree and trident. Also
identified as a manifestation of Sˇiva and one of the *EKADASARUDRAS*
(eleven forms of **Magha**

RUDRA). In northern India among tribes includ-Minor goddess of fortune.
Hindu (Epic and ing the Gonds, the expression Mahadeo (great Puranic). A
benevolent *NAKSATRA;* daughter of god) is directed toward Sˇiva as the
supreme deity.

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Maha-Ganapati**

**Mah**

Elephant god. Hindu (Puranic). This form of Moon god. Persian \[Iran\].
The progenitor of the the god GANESA possesses ten arms instead of the
cow, typically depicted with the tips of a sickle more normal four and
may have a goddess, moon projecting from his shoulders.

BUDDHI or SIDDHI, seated on the knee.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p197}182 **Mahakala** **Mahakala** *(the great
death)* to be personifications of amulets or *mantras.* Also 1. God.
Hindu (Puranic). A violent aspect of SˇIVA.

an emanation of the *DHYANIBUDDHA* RATNASAMB-His SAKTI is Mahakah. Rides
upon a lion. Color: HAVA, alternatively of AKSOBHYA. She is a guardian
black. Attributes: five arrows, ax, Brahma-egg, club, of the west, south
and eastern quarters according to cup, rosary of skulls, staff and
trident. Three-eyed.

separate traditions. Color: blue, black, green, white Also considered to
be a form of the god BHAIRAVA or red. Attributes: most commonly noose
and staff.

in which context he is a guardian of the faith.

From four to twelve arms; may be three-headed.

2\. Guardian god of tents and science. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].
Derived from the Hindu god Sˇiva and an emanation of the five
DHYANIBUD-Mahamataras

DHAS *.* Also one of a group of DHARMAPALAS with Group of goddesses.
Hindu. Personifications of terrible appearance and royal attire. A deity
of the SAKTI of the god SˇIVA.

riches. He treads on the god Vinayaka, or on a man, a corpse, or on two
elephant-headed men.

Color: black, blue or white. Attributes: mainly **Mahamayuri**

*(great daughter of the peacock)* elephant skin, prayer wheel and
trident, but may Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An extremely hold various
other objects.

popular deity and an emanation of AMOGHASIDDHI. A female BODHISATTVA or
*buddha-* designate *.*

Also one of a group of five MAHARAKSAS (protec-Mahakali

tresses) who are thought to be personifications of 1. Goddess of
learning. Jain \[India\]. One of sixteen amulets or *mantras.* Color:
green, red or yellow.

VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

Attributes: alms bowl, arrow, banner, bow, fly 2. Form of the goddess
KALI. Hindu. Also a whisk, image of Amoghasiddhi on crown, jewel, SAKTI
of MAHAKALA. Attributes: conch, cup, mendicant, peacock feather, prayer
wheel, sword headdress, hook, knife, noose, rosary of skulls, and water
jar. Three-eyed and may occasionally staff, sword, waterjar and wheel.

appear three- or four-headed.

**Mahakapi** *(great ape)* **Mahanaga**

God. Buddhist. Epithet of the BUDDHA in a pre-Snake god. Hindu. A group
of seven deities iden-vious incarnation, appearing as an ape.

tical with a group of seven *nagadevas.*

**Mahamanasika** *(great-minded)* Goddess of learning. Jain \[India\].
One of sixteen **Mahapadma**

*(great lotus)*

V

Snake god. Hindu. Attributes: rosary and water-IDYADEVI headed by the
goddess SARASVATI.

jar. Three-eyed.

**Mahamantranusarini**

*(following the great*

*sacred text)*

**Mahaparinirvanamurti**

Guardian goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of God. Buddhist. The
depiction of the BUDDHA five MAHARAKSAS (protectresses) who are thought
lying in *nirvana* (paradise).

[]{#index_split_004.html#p198}**Mahasthama(prapta)** 183

**Mahaprabhu**

Attributes: particularly noose, prayer wheel and Tutelary god. Orissa
\[India\]. The local supreme sword, but also depicted with other objects
deity of the Bondo tribe.

including image of Vairocana on crown. May be four-headed.

**Mahapratisara**

*(great protectress)*

Guardian goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of **Maha-Sarasvati**

five MAHARAKSAS (protectresses) who are thought 1. Goddess. Hindu
(Puranic). An emanation of to be personifications of amulets or
*mantras.* A LAKSMI. Attributes: book, hook, lute and rosary.

guardian of the central or southern direction.

2\. Goddess. Buddhist. A variety of SARASVATI.

Also an emanation of the *DHYANIBUDDHA* RAT-Depicted upon a lotus.
Color: white. Attributes: NASAMBHAVA. Color: yellow. Attributes: arrow,
ax, garland of pearls and white lotus.

banner, bow, conch, image of Ratnasambhava on crown, jewel, noose,
parasol, prayer wheel, reliquary, sword, staff and trident. Three-headed
and **Mahasitavati**

*(great cold one)*

three-eyed.

Guardian goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of five MAHARAKSAS
(protectresses) who are thought to be personifications of amulets or
**Mahapratyangira**

*(great goddess whose*

*mantras.* Also an emanation of the *DHYANIBUD-speech is directed
westwards)* *DHA* AMITABHA (or sometimes RATNASAMB-Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An emanation of HAVA). A guardian of the north or west
quarter.

the *DHYANIBUDDHA* AKSOBHYA. Color: blue.

Color: red, yellow or green. Attributes: arrow, Attributes: hook, image
of Aksobhya on crown, ax, banner, book, bow, bowl, image of Amitabha
noose, red lotus, sword and trident.

on the crown, lotus, noose, peacock feather, staff, sword and trident.
Three-eyed and may be three-headed.

**Maharaksa**

*(great protectress)*

Group of guardian goddesses. Buddhist. Personifications of amulets or
*mantras.* Common attrib-Mahasri-Tars

*(of great beauty)*

ute: a parasol.

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of AMOGHASIDDHI. Depicted
seated upon a moon.

Color: green. Attributes: image of Amoghasiddhi **Maharatri**

*(the great night)*

and lotuses.

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Associated with KALI and KAMALA.

**Mahasthama(prapta)**

*(he who has attained*

*great power)*

**Mahasahaspramardani** *(the thousand fold* God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A
*dhyanibodhisattva* *destroyer)*

who personifies great wisdom. Color: white or Goddess. Buddhist. An
emanation of VAIROCANA, yellow. Attributes: lotus, six lotuses and
sword.

and one of the MAHARAKSAS *.* Color: white.

(May have no attributes present.)

[]{#index_split_004.html#p199}184 **Mahavidya** **Mahavidya**

ritual, and is identified with the act of prayer.

Collective name of a group of goddesses. Bud-Usually associated with the
goddess SARASVATI.

dhist (Mahayana). Ten personifications of SAKTI as the femaleness of
SˇIVA, associated with the possession of knowledge.

**Mahisa** *(buffalo)*

Demonic god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).

Depicted most frequently in the form of a buffalo, **Mahayasa**

*(most glorious)*

but he also confounds the gods by changing him-Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-self into many other animal guises. He is
eventu-dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

ally slain by the goddess DEVI in the form of MAHISASURAMARDINI.

**Maheo** *(all-spirit)*

**Mahisasuramardini** *(slayer of the buffalo* Creator god. Cheyenne
\[USA\]. He first lived in *demon)*

the void and then created the great primordial Form of the goddess D

water of life. He made the earth from a ball of EVI. Hindu (Puranic).

Appearing from the fourth century mud and engendered mankind from one of
his AD onward,

this goddess is a

ribs which he implanted in earth woman (Chris-DURGA form of Devi. She
pos-

sesses up to twelve arms holding an assortment of tian influence has
probably been exerted here).

weapons and may be seated on a lion. According to legend, the form arose
in response to the threat **Mahes**

from the demonic MAHISA who was eventually slain by the goddess Devi
with his own sword.

Sun god. Egyptian. An ancient deity worshiped Attributes: ax, banner,
bell, bow, club, conch, chiefly in the region of the Nile delta and
repre-drum, hook, lizard, mirror, noose, prayer wheel, senting the
destructive power of the sun's heat.

shield, sword, staff and trident. Three-eyed.

Depicted in the form of a lion. Also Miysis (Greek).

**Mahodadhi**

*(the great ocean)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-Mahesvari

dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A SAKTI who in later Hinduism
became one of a group of seven MATARAS regarded as of evil **Mahrem**

intent. Also one of eight ASTAMATARAS *.* In another Head of pantheon.
Axumite (ancient Ethiopic grouping one of a group of nine NAVASAKTIS
who, kingdom). A warrior deity after whom the in southern India, rank
higher than the SAPTA-Axumite kings titled themselves "sons of MATARAS.
Attributes: antelope, arrow, ax, bow, MAHREM."

club, drum, prayer wheel, staff and trident.

**Mahuikez**

**Mahi**

*(earth)*

Fire god. Polynesian. Identified with earthquakes Minor goddess of
sacrifice. Hindu (Vedic). She is and possibly paralleling TOUIA FATUNA
(iron invoked to appear on the sacrificial field before a stone goddess)
in Tongan belief.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p200}**Malamanganga'e** 185

**Maia**

**Maju**

Chthonic or earth goddess. Greco-Roman. Orig-God. Basque \[Pyrenean
region\]. The consort of inally, in pre-Homeric times, a mountain spirit
the mother goddess MARI, he appears in the guise who subsequently became
a minor consort of of a serpent.

ZEUS. The Romans worshiped her as an obscure goddess of the plains who
became briefly a consort of JUPITER, and they perceived her as the
**Make Make**

mother of the messenger god Mercury. Her cult Sea god. Polynesian
\[Easter Island\]. The tutelary was associated with that of VULCANUS.
Possibly deity of the Easter Islanders, he created mankind the origin of
the name of the month of May.

and animals. His sacred animal is the sea swallow *See also* MERCURIUS.

and the huge anthropomorphic stone figures which characterize the
island's archaeology form part of his cult.

**MAITREYA**

*(the loving one)*

**ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. Bodhisattva or *buddha*-

designate.

**Mal**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 500 BC to present.

Creator god. Early Dravidian (Tamil). Probably equating with a
syncretization of V

**SYNONYMS** none.

ISŇU and

K

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** pan-Asiatic.

RSNA. The name implies a deity of great stature.

In Sangam texts, his face is like the moon, his **ART REFERENCES** metal
and stone sculptures, paintings.

eyes are lotuses and his CAKRA is the beams of the sun. Also T

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Sadhanamala* and Tantric IRUMAL.

ritual texts.

One of the most popular deities of the Mahayana **Mala** *(garland)*

and Hinayana sects of Buddhism. He originates Mother goddess.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One from the yellow mantra syllable MAIM in
the of a group of ASTAMATARA deities. Color: red or Tusita heaven. He is
also regarded as a *manusi-yellow. Attributes: garland of forest
flowers, or of *buddha* or future human *buddha.* He equates with
jewels.*

KALKIN in Hinduism and is perceived as a happy, rubicund figure of
benevolent character. He has no SAKTI and his attendant animal is a
lion. Color: **Malakbel**

gold or yellow. Attributes: five DHYANIBUDDHAS *,* Vegetation god.
Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

flower, prayer wheel, shrine (in the hair) and Mentioned as the brother
of AGLIBOL on an water jar. May be three-eyed or three-headed. He
inscription at Palmyra dated to AD 132.

may also be identified symbolically by white blossoms. Also MI-LO FO
(Chinese).

**Malamanganga'e**

*(light eastward)*

**Majas Gars**

Creator being. Polynesian. One of the two per-Household god.
Pre-Christian Latvian. Invoked sonifications of light who, with
MALAMANGAN-until very recent times in country districts as a deity
GAIFO, engendered Lupe, the dove, whose consort who would bring
prosperity to the family home.

is rock. From these primordial principles came

[]{#index_split_004.html#p201}186 **Malamangangaifo** several
generations of supernatural beings whose ence under Inca rule. Invoked
by all Indians who descendants engendered mankind.

gain their livelihood from the sea. Today probably syncretized largely
with the Christian Virgin Mary. Also Mama Cocha.

**Malamangangaifo** *(light westward)* Creator being. Polynesian.

*See also* MALAMANGANGA'E.

**Mamaki** *(greedy)*

Goddess. Buddhist. The SAKTI of RATNASAMBHAVA or AKSOBHYA. Also a
BODHISATTVA or future *bud-Malhal Mata*

*dha,* originating from the blue *mantra* MAM.

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One Color: yellow or blue.
Attributes: cup, flowers, of seven SAKTIS who in later Hinduism became
jewel, knife and staff.

regarded as SAPTAMATARAS (mothers) of evil intent. Particularly known in
Bengal as a bringer of disease.

**Mama-Kilya**

*(mother moon)*

Moon goddess. Inca (pre-Columbian South America) \[Peru, etc\]. The
consort of the sun god **Malik**

*(king)*

INTI, she is important in the calculation of time Tutelary god.
Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

and regulating the Inca festival calendar. The Known from inscriptions.

Indians consider that an eclipse of the moon is a time of great danger,
caused by a mountain lion or snake eating the moon, and perform a ritual
mak-Mam

ing as much noise as possible to frighten the pred-God of evil. Mayan
(Yucatec, classical Mesoamer-ator off.

ican) \[Mexico\]. A much-feared deity who lives beneath the earth and
only emerges in times of crisis. Depicted in the form of a flat,
life-sized **Mami**

piece of wood dressed as a scarecrow and set upon Mother goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and a stool. He is offered food and drink during
Babylonian-Akkadian). Identified in the *Atrahasis* Uayeb, the period of
five unlucky days at the end texts and other creation legends and
probably of the year, after which the figure is undressed and synonymous
with NINHURSAG˜A. She was involved unceremoniously thrown away. During
Uayeb in the creation of mankind from clay and blood.

devotees fast and refer to the god as "grandfather."

The name almost certainly came into use because it is the first word
that a child formulates. Also Mama; Mammitum.

**Mama**

See MAMI.

**Mamitu**

**Mama Qoca**

*(mother sea)*

Goddess of oaths and treaties. Mesopotamian Goddess of the ocean. Inca
(pre-Columbian (Babylonian-Akkadian). One of the consorts of South
America) \[Peru, etc\]. Originally a pre-Inca NERGAL and subsequently
identified as a chthonic goddess of coastal regions who retained her
influ-underworld deity. Also Mammetu.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p202}**Mandulis** 187

**Mamlambo**

**Manawat**

River goddess. Zulu \[Natal, South Africa\]. Con-Goddess

of

destiny.

Western

Semitic

sidered to control all the rivers running through (Nabataean). Mentioned
in a large number of Natal. Also a patron of beer-makers, who are
usu-inscriptions.

ally women.

**Manawyddan**

**Manannan (Mac Lir)**

Sea god. Celtic (Welsh). The counterpart of the Sea god. Celtic (Irish
and British). Extensively Irish god MANANNAN. He is the consort of
worshiped. From the name is derived the "Isle RHIANNON and is regarded
as a skilled craftsman.

of Man" where, according to tradition, the god is buried. He rules the
"Isle of the Blessed"

and determines the weather at sea. Father of **sMan-Bla**

*(physician)*

the Irish hero Mongan. Also Manawyddaw God. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].
One of the more (Welsh).

popular medicine- *buddhas* and possibly derived from Persian
light-religion. Attributes: fruit and waterjar.

**Manasa**

Snake goddess. Hindu. The daughter of KASYAPA and KADRU and the sister
of the lord of **Mandah**

serpents, Vasuki. She is also a gracious aspect of Collective name of
gods. Pre-Islamic Arabian.

PARVATI. Known particuarly from Bihar, Bengal Guardian deities, whose
chief responsibility is and Assam. She stands upon, or is shaded by, a
irrigation.

seven-headed snake. Attributes: snake and waterjar.

**Mandanu**

God of divine judgment. Mesopotamian (Baby-Manasi

*(spiritual)*

lonian-Akkadian). Known from the neo-Baby-Goddess of learning. Jain
\[India\]. One of sixteen lonian period.

VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

**Mandhata**

*(thoughtful)*

**Manat**

*(fate)*

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Minor *avatara* of Goddess. Pre-Islamic
Arabian. One of the so-VISŇU. One of the "lords of the universe."

called Daughters of ALLAH, she is primarily identified with a shrine
(lost) between Mecca and Medina.

**Mandulis**

*\[Greek\]*

Sun god. Nubian. Mandulis was chiefly revered in a Greco-Roman cult. His
most important sanc-Manavi

*(descended from Manu)*

tuary was at Kalabsha, close to the Aswan High Goddess of learning. Jain
\[India\]. One of sixteen Dam, and now relocated. A sanctuary was also
VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

constructed on the Greek island of Philae where

[]{#index_split_004.html#p203}188 **Manes**

he seems to have enjoyed an association with the the heroic god
NANABOZHO. They are the goddess ISIS. Also Merwel (Egyptian).

ultimate source of existence and are essential to the continuance of
life. It is necessary for mankind to maintain close communication with
**Manes**

them.

Hearth deities. Roman. Technically souls separated from the body, these
objects of ancestor worship became classed as guardian divinities in
**Manitu**

Roman households. Celebrated in the feast of Creator god. Algonquin
Indian \[USA\]. A vaguely *Parentalia.* Origin of the title on graves:
*Dis* defined being who controls all things and imparts *Manibus.*

knowledge to the tribe. He may be identified as the great spirit in the
sky. Probably similar to MANITO.

**Mangala**

*(auspicious)*

1\. Astral god. Hindu. Personification of the planet MARS. Depicted by a
chariot drawn by **Manjughosa**

*(sweet sounding)*

eight red fire-horses. According to some authors God. Buddhist. Form of
the god MANJUSRI and Mangala is a form of the god SˇIVA in his cruel an
emanation of AKSOBHYA. Attended by a lion.

aspect. Attributes: club and lotus. Three-eyed.

Color: white or gold. Attributes: arrow, bell, blue 2. Goddess. A form
of PARVATI. She rides upon a lotus, book, bow, image of Aksobhya, staff
and lion and may bear up to ten arms, carrying arrow, sword.

mirror, moon disc, rosary, shield and sword.

Three-eyed.

**MANJUSRI**

*(pleasing splendor)*

**ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. Bodhisattva or *buddha*-

**Mani**

designate, also god of wisdom.

Moon god. Germanic and Nordic (Icelandic). He **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 500 BC until guides the chariot of the moon through the
night present.

sky and is involved in the downfall of the world at **SYNONYMS** large
number of forms.

Ragnarok.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** pan-Asiatic **ART REFERENCES** metal and stone
sculptures, paintings.

**Manidhara**

*(holding a gem)*

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Sadhanamala* and Tantric Minor god. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An attendant ritual texts.

of SADAKSARI. Attributes: jewel and lotus.

An important and popular deity throughout all sects of Buddhism. He is
the son of either **Manito**

AMITABHA or AKSOBHYA and is closely linked with Creator being. Ojibwa
\[Canada\]. One of a num-the goddess PRAJNAPARAMITA who is seen as the
ber of very powerful beings all identified by the personification of a
holy text which MANJUSRI same title. These deities include the four
winds, habitually carries, the *pustaka*. His attendant ani-the
thunderbirds, the underwater manitos and mal is the tiger or the lion.
Color: black, white,

[]{#index_split_004.html#p204}**MARDUK** 189

red or yellow. Attributes: chiefly book and sword, **Mara**

*(the destroyer)*

but also arrow, blue lotus and bow. May be three-1. God. Buddhist. An
evil deity who puts obsta-headed.

cles in the way of the BUDDHA. The equal of the Hindu god Kama. In
Buddhist tradition, the Hindu gods INDRA, BRAHMA, VISŇU and SˇIVA are
**Manmatha**

maras who become vanquished by various Bud-Form of the god of carnal
love. Dravidian (Tamil).

dhist deities. Attributes: fish standard.

A local southern Indian form of Kama with sim-2. God. Hindu. An epithet
of KAMA(DEVA).

ilar attributes and genealogy, named in Sangam literature.

**Marama**

Moon goddess. Polynesian (Maori). She equates **Manohel-Tohel**

with the Tahitian goddess HINA, daughter of Creator god. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) TANGAROA. Tradition has it that her body wastes

\[Mexico\]. The deity concerned specifically away with each lunar cycle
but is restored when with the creation of mankind, giving mortals she
bathes in the sea from which all life springs.

body and soul and leading them from the caves into the light.

**Maramalik**

Chthonic underworld god. Kafir \[Afghanistan\].

**Manu**

No details known.

Primordial creator god. Hindu (Vedic). The son(s) of SURYA. The name
given to the fourteen original progenitors of mankind during **MARDUK**

the mythical or heroic ages. According to tradi-ORIGIN Mesopotamian
(Babylonian) \[Iraq\]. Cre-tion, the consort of Manu is Ida, who was
ator and national god.

engendered from milk and butter offered to **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 2000 BC, or SˇIVA as a propitiation.

earlier, to circa 200 BC.

**SYNONYMS** Lugal-dimmer-an-ki-a (divine king of heaven and earth);
Asˇalluhe; Merodach **Manungal**

(Hebrew). At least fifty other divine names, Chthonic underworld god.
Mesopotamian according to the Babylonian creation epic.

(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). A minor **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Babylon.

deity, the consort of BIRDU.

**ART REFERENCES** plaques, votive stelae, glyptics, etc.

**LITERARY SOURCES** cuneiform texts, particularly **Maponos**

the Babylonian creation epic *Enuma Elisˇ.*

Tribal deity. Celtic (British and Continental European). A youthful god
worshiped by Marduk is the chief deity of Babylonia and tute-the
Brigantes tribe in Britain and probably lary god of the city of Babylon
though perhaps assimilated with APOLLO in the Romano-Celtic derived, in
part, from a Sumerian model. His period.

parents are ENKI and DAMGALNUNA or EA and

[]{#index_split_004.html#p205}190 **Mari (1)** DAMKINA. His consort is
the goddess ZARPAN-She may breathe fire and is symbolized by the ITU(M)
with whom his marriage was re-enacted rainbow. When she and her consort
meet, a thun-in an annual New Year festival. In the Old Baby-derstorm
forms. Her symbol is a sickle which is lonian period he was
comparatively insignificant, still employed as a device to ward off
evil.

but in subsequent times he rose to prominence, taking over the role of
AN and replacing ENLIL.

At the time of the Assyrian takeover, Assyrian **Mari Mai**

*(mother death)*

scribes replaced Marduk with A

Plague goddess. Hindu. The sister of S

SSUR.

ITALA,

In the mythology of the creation epic, Marduk associated with cholera.
Her Tamil counterpart is is engaged in a primordial cosmic battle with T

M

IA-

ARIYAMMAN.

MAT, the power of the ocean. He kills her, splitting her in half and
using parts of her corpse to make **Marici**

*(shining)*

heaven and earth. Tiamat fought him in revenge 1. Astral goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An ema-for the death of APSU, the deep, and is said
to have nation of VAIROCANA and also his female aspect or created an
exact replica of Apsu, the Esˇarra.

SAKTI *.* She is further identified as a *buddha*-desig-The symbol of
Marduk is the triangular device nate or BODHISATTVA. She may also be the
mother used in Mesopotamia as an agricultural tool and of SAKYAMUNI (a
form of the BUDDHA). Consid-called a *mar*.

ered by some to be the equal of the Hindu SURYA.

The main Marduk festival was the *akitu*, also She may be depicted in a
three-headed form (as performed at New Year, which continued up to as
the Sakti of HAYAGRIVA), in which case her left late as 200 BC. It was
performed by the Persian head is that of a pig. She rides in a chariot
drawn ruler Cambyses circa 538 BC. Marduk's sanctuary by seven boars.
Color: red, yellow or white.

in Babylon is the Esagila and the E-temen-anki Attributes: arrow, bow,
fly whisk, horse's head ziggurat.

image in the hair, needle, prayer wheel, staff, sword, thread and
trident. Three-eyed.

2\. Demiurge. Hindu. A product of the creator **Mari (1)**

*(killing)*

god BRAHMA.

1\. Deification of literature. Buddhist. One of a group of DHARANIS *.*
Color: reddish white. Attributes: needle, thread and staff.

**Mariyamman**

*(mother of smallpox)*

2\. Mother goddess. Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern Plague goddess.
Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern India\].

India\]. A terrible goddess, one of the NAVASAKTIS

*See also* MARI MAI.

and linked with the goddess KALI. She is honored in a ritual during
which victims (in penance) are suspended from a rope and an iron hook
through **Mari (2)**

*(queen)*

the flesh of the back and whirled around a pole.

Supreme mother goddess. Basque \[Pyrenean Also Mariyattal.

region\]. She is both a sky and chthonic goddess and her consort is
MAJU. She is depicted dressed in rich clothing and jewels. Her home is
within **Marnas**

the earth but she also rides through the air in a Local tutelary god.
Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

chariot pulled by four horses or carried by a ram.

Probably regarded as a fertility deity, his cult was

[]{#index_split_004.html#p206}**Mata** 191

centered at Gaza at the Marneion sanctuary and weather, is derivative
and the month was dedi-probably succeeded that of Dagon. He may have
cated to the god.

been the subject of a colossal statue attributed to The training ground
for would-be Roman ZEUS found near Gaza.

legionaries was known as the Campus Martius *See also* DAGAN.

(field of Mars). Mars's sacred animals include the bull, wolf and
woodpecker.

*See also* AMOR.

**MARS**

**ORIGIN** Roman. God of war.

**Martu**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to circa

Tutelary god. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). The AD 400.

patron god of the city of Ninab mentioned in the **SYNONYMS** ARES
(Greek).

texts but never re-discovered. Probably not a true **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
the Mars Ultor sanctuary (Augustine) in Rome.

Sumerian deity but adopted from an unknown western Semitic culture. He
is sometimes identi-ART REFERENCES large number of sculptures and
carvings.

fied as a storm god.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Aeneid* (Virgil), etc.

**Maru**

Mars may have originated as a god of vegetation, God of war. Polynesian
and Maori. One of the but becomes closely modeled on the Greek war
important deities revered by Maori clans in New god Ares. The son of
JUPITER and JUNO, he is Zealand in times of war, he may be represented
in one of the major deities on the Roman pantheon totems as an
aggressive face with a prominent tuft and the patron of all soldiers. He
was particularly of hair, staring eyes and tongue protruding, popular in
Roman Britain.

though these totems generally represent ances-He is depicted wearing a
suit of armor with a tors rather than deities. Maru may be invoked in
plumed helmet. He bears a shield and spear. His the familiar Maori war
dances and chants demon-retinue includes Metus (Fear), Demios (Dread),
strated popularly by the All Blacks before rugby Phobos (Alarm), ERIS
(Discord) and Pallor (Ter-matches all over the world.

ror). Mars is frequently linked with BELLONA, the minor Roman war
goddess who drives his chariot. He took an active part in the primordial
**Marutgana**

war between gods and giants. His consort is Storm gods. Hindu (Vedic).
The sons of RUDRA VENUS and he is the father of HARMONIA, Cupid and
attendants of INDRA. Also Maruts.

and Anteros. He is also romantically linked with the *vestal* Ilia, who
was buried alive for contra-vening the laws of her sisterhood. Through
Ilia **Mata**

*(great mother)*

Mars fathered Romulus, the alleged founder of Primeval mother goddess.
Hindu. The archetypal the city of Rome, and Remus, who was slain by
progenitrix of all living things. She becomes the Romulus. It was the
convention that a Roman tutelary goddess of every village in northern
India, general, before setting out for combat, would but is also seen as
a plague goddess associated with invoke Mars in his sanctuary. The name
of smallpox, in which case her epithet becomes Maha the month of March,
noted for its violent Mai. Her Tamil counterpart is Amman.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p207}192 **Matara**

**Matara**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** various shrines.

Mother goddess. Hindu. Applied collectively to **ART REFERENCES**
various Romano-Celtic sculp-groups of deities, the divine mothers, also
more tures, reliefs and votive plaques. An excellent specifically to the
consort of the god KASYAPA. As example comes from Cirencester, England.

divine mothers they are also regarded as SAKTIS.

**LITERARY SOURCES** inscriptions.

The numbers vary according to separate traditions and they are therefore
identified as the Triads of benevolent mother goddesses were
SAPTAMATARAS (seven), ASTAMATARAS (eight) and probably worshiped, in the
main, as household NAVASAKTIS (nine). Less commonly there may be deities
guarding against disease or famine. An up to fifty mataras in a group.
Their images are important sculpture of Matres was found embed-normally
carved in stone (very few exist in metal) ded in the walls of London on
a section of fourth and they are depicted seated, often upon a corpse,
century rebuilding adjacent to the Thames.

and may be of terrifying appearance.

Another, the *Matres Aufaniae*, was dedicated by Quettius Severus, the
quaestor of the colony of Cologne. Several unnamed Matres are held in
the **Matarisvan**

Corinium museum at Cirencester. The sculptures Minor messenger god.
Hindu (Vedic). The atten-are often associated with comucopiae, baskets
dant of AGNI.

of fruit, loaves, sheaves of grain, fish or other symbols of prosperity
and fertility. They may also carry or suckle children. Many of the
triads were **Mater Matuta**

specific to regions, hence the Treverae among the Sky goddess. Italic.
The personification of the Treveri tribe around modern Trier, or the
dawn light who evolved into a fertility deity con-Nemausicae at Nimes.

cerned with childbirth. She is also a tutelary god-Many of the
dedications to such mothers were dess of mariners.

made by soldiers. There is a slight suggestion that *See also* ISIS.

they might also have been linked to victory in battle. The plaque found
in London seems to have the mothers holding palm fronds. They are
**Matlalcueye**

*(her skirt is blue)*

also not infrequently depicted with dogs, which Minor fertility goddess.
Aztec (classical Meso-were generally included as symbols of healing.

american) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as Some, particularly
from the Rhineland, show the TLALOC complex, closely associated with
young and older figures, suggesting the different water.

ages of womanhood.

**MATRES**

*(mothers)*

**Matsuo**

**ORIGIN** Romano-Celtic (across Europe but partic-God of sake brewers.
Shinto \[Japan\]. Celebrated ularly Rhineland). Triads of mother
goddesses.

annually in a festival in Kyoto, when the **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 400 BC, but presence of the god is carried on a palanquin.

probably much earlier, until Christianization It is rowed down the river
prior to a general (circa AD 400).

celebration, during which sake is drunk **SYNONYMS** Deae Mattes;
Matronae.

liberally.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p208}**Mayajalakrama-Kurukulla** 193

**Matsya**

**Mawu**

Incarnation of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and 1. Moon goddess. Fon
\[Benin, West Africa). The Puranic). In this first *avatara* Visňu
appears as a sister of the sun god LISA. She is also considered fish
which, according to one legend, tows a ship to bestow fertility and
motherhood and is gener-carrying the law-giver MANU to safety after the
ally benevolent in nature.

primal flood. Matsya engages in an epic battle 2. Sky god. Ewe \[Togo,
West Africa\]. Among the with the demon HAYAGRIVA who stole the *Vedas*
tribe neighboring the Fon. Mawu is perceived as from a sleeping BRAHMA.
Usually depicted with a male and a creator deity. He favors the color
human torso carrying symbols, e.g. wheel and white and is also
benevolent and generous in conch, on a fish's body.

nature.

**Maturaiviran**

**Maya(devi)**

Locally worshiped god. Hindu. Of fearsome Mother goddess. Buddhist. The
mother of the character, he is the deification of a seventeenth BUDDHA
perceived as the world lotus or *PADMA* from which the Buddha was born.
She equates century policeman who eloped with a princess with the Hindu
goddess L

and was slain. Known from southern India, where AKSMI. The term is

also applied to the personification of the visible he is also a god of
wine. Attributes: shield and universe and, in Hinduism, as an epithet of
the sword.

goddess DURGA.

**Maui**

**Mayahuel**

Tutelary god. Polynesian (Maori) \[New Minor fertility goddess. Aztec
(classical Zealand\]. Not a creator god but one who assists
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico). One of the group mankind in various
supernatural ways. Accord-classed as the Ometochtli complex associated
ing to tradition he was aborted at birth and cast with the maguey plant
from which pulque is into the sea by his mother, who thought he was
brewed. She may be depicted seated upon dead. He was rescued entangled
in seaweed. He a tortoise beside an agave plant in bloom.

is the deity who drew the islands of New According to legend she was
abducted by Zealand from the floor of the ocean in a net.

QUETZALCOATL and subsequently dismembered Maui caught the sun and beat
it into submis-by wild animals. From the fragments grew the sion, making
it travel more slowly across the sky first agave plants.

so that the days became longer. He also brought fire from the underworld
for mankind and tried, unsuccessfully, to harness immortality for him
**Mayajalakrama-Kurukulla**

*(one who pro-*

`</i>`{=html}

*by entering the vulva of the underworld god-ceeds in the net of
illusion)* dess HINE-NUI-TE-PO while she was asleep.

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). The personifi-She awoke and crushed him to
death. Though a cation of all DHYANIBUDDHAS *.* Color: red.
Attrib-deity, he had been made vulnerable to death utes: arrow, bow,
hook, images of the five by a mistake during his rites of birth ( *see
also* Dhyanibuddhas *,* lotus (red), pitcher, rosary and BALDER). Also
Mawi.

waterjar.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p209}194 **Mayin**

**Mayin**

invoked at sunrise each morning. The creator god Supreme god. Tungus
\[eastern and central of all black people, said to reside in black
waters.

Siberia\]. A benevolent but remote deity who breathes life into newborn
children and receives the spirits of the dead.

**Mbotumbo**

Creator god. Baule \[Ivory Coast, West Africa\]. A generally benevolent
guardian deity with the head **Mayon**

*(the black one)*

of an ape.

Creator god. Early Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern India and Sri Lanka\].
Animistic high god of the pastoral regions, found in Sangam literature
and **Medeine**

*(of the trees)*

thought to reside in trees. Perhaps equating with Woodland goddess.
Pre-Christian Latvian.

VISŇU or KRSNA.

Known from medieval manuscripts.

**Ma-zu**

**Medha**

*(wisdom)*

Sea goddess. Chinese. Known from the coastal Minor goddess. Buddist
(Mahayana). The SAKTI regions of southeastern China as a benevolent of
Sridhara.

guardian of fishermen, and closely linked with the goddess KUAN YIN.

**Meditrina**

Goddess of healing. Roman. Syncretized into the **Mbomba**

cult of AESCULAPIUS.

Creator god. Mongo and Nkundo \[Democratic Republic of Congo, central
Africa\]. He operates through intermediaries known as *bilima*
**Meghanada**

*(cloud roar)*

and through the spirits of the dead, *bakali.* Also Minor god. Hindu. A
son of Ravana who once known as landa, Komba, Mbombo, Njakomba briefly
bested INDRA and became known as the and WAI. Among the Ngbandi people
there is

"Indra-conqueror."

recognized a vast water monster or river god by the same name.

**Mehen**

Minor chthonic underworld god. Egyptian. The **Mbombe**

guardian of the barque of the sun god RE during Mother goddess. Nkundo
\[Democratic Republic its passage through the underworld at night.

of Congo, central Africa\]. The consort of ITONDE

Depicted in the form of a coiled snake.

and mother of the hero LIANJA.

**Meher**

**Mbongo**

Sun god. Pre-Christian Armenian. Closely linked River god. Ngbandi
\[Democratic Republic of with the Persian model of MITHRA, he is the son
Congo, central Africa\]. One of seven deities of Aramazd who appears in
the form of fire. In

[]{#index_split_004.html#p210}**Mena** 195

contrast to this imagery, his home is said to be in Gadeira/Cadiz were
renamed the Pillars of Hera cave and he takes the animal guise of a
raven.

cules by the Romans.

**Mehet-Weret**

*(great flood)*

**Me'mdeye-Eci'e**

Minor goddess associated with creation accounts.

Fire spirit. Yukaghir \[eastern Siberia\]. A benevolent Egyptian. In
some versions of the story she epit-being residing in the sky and known
as "father fire."

omizes the primeval ocean, while in others she is the waterway on which
the barque of the sun god RE travels. She is depicted as a cow bearing a
sun **Men**

disc between its horns and lying on papyrus reeds.

Moon god. Phrygian \[Turkey\]. Ruler of both upper and lower worlds.
Probably also a god of healing, he was subsequently adopted by the
**Mellonia**

Greeks and Romans. The cult was popular during Goddess of bees. Roman.

the imperial period, but its inscriptions were written in Greek.

**MELQART**

**ORIGIN** Phoenician \[Turkey\]. Heroic tutelary **Men Ascaenus**

god.

Local tutelary god. Antioch-near-Pisidia. Possibly **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1200 BC to originating as a Persian moon god and known
200 BC.

chiefly from a description by Strabo. He enjoyed **SYNONYMS**
Milk-quart.

a substantial cult including a temple some 1,200

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Tyre.

meters above sea level. His symbol is the head of **ART REFERENCES**
possibly sculptures in stone.

a bull above a crescent moon and wreath; it **LITERARY SOURCES**
Herodotus and local inscrip-appears on local coinage circa AD 200. The
pop-tions; *Vetus Testamentum.*

ularity of the cult earned antagonism from the Roman occupation.

A god of youthful appearance often associated *See also* MEN.

with the sea. Known mainly from Tyre, where he was regarded as the
consort of ASTARTE and probably constituted part of a trio of major
deities **Men Shen**

with BAAL SˇAMIN and Astarte. He may be God of passage. Chinese. One of
a pair of deities, depicted on coinage riding a sea-horse. The cult
armed with bow and arrows, who guard door-of Melqart spread extensively
through Egypt, ways and gates. Paper images are pinned to Carthage,
Cyprus, etc. Melqart equates with entrances of homes during the New Year
cele-ESˇMUN, the tutelary god of Sidon. Known in brations to ward off
evil spirits.

Hebrew tradition as the ruler of the underworld and probably based on
the Sumerian/Akkadian NERGAL. In Hellenic times he becomes defined
**Mena**

more as a sun god, but is largely syncretized with Mountain goddess.
Hindu. The consort of HIMA-HERAKLES. The pillars in the sanctuary at VAN
and the mother of GANGA and PARVATI.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p211}196 **Menechen** **Menechen**

*(master of men)*

cattle from APOLLO, an allegory on the blowing Supreme god. Araucania
Indian \[southern Andes\].

away of the clouds (Apollo's herds). Mercury also Also known as Pillan
(heaven) and, west of the personifies the wind. Apollo presented Mercury
Andes, Guenu-Pillan (spirit of heaven).

with the gift of his winged baton, the *caduceus,* which had the power
of resolving conflict and dispute. The gods also presented Mercury with
the **Meness**

winged sandals or *talaria* and cap or *petasus.*

Moon god. Pre-Christian Latvian. Consort of the Originally he was a god
of riches but became a sun goddess SAULE. He is a guardian deity of
trav-patron of travelers and thieves. The French for elers and military
expeditions.

Wednesday, mercredi, derives from his name. His main annual festival,
the *Mercuralia*, took place in Rome in May and his statues were
frequently **Menulis**

placed as boundary markers.

Moon god. Pre-Christian Lithuanian. Consort of As Psychopompus he leads
the souls of the dead the sun goddess.

into Hades, and as Oneicopompus he oversees the world of dreams.

**Menzabac**

*(black powder maker)*

Weather god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) **Meretseger**

\[Mexico\]. He sprinkles black dye on the clouds, Localized chthonic
goddess associated with the which causes them to generate rain. Believed
to underworld. Egyptian. At Thebes she acted in live on the edge of a
lake. Also a fever god and a either benign or destructive fashion
against work-keeper of good souls. Also Metzabac.

ers building tombs in the Valley of the Kings. She is generally depicted
as a coiled cobra which may possess a human head and arm. One of the
best **MERCURIUS**

representations is on the sarcophagus of Rameses **ORIGIN** Roman.
Messenger god.

III\. She lost her popularity when the use of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to Thebes as a royal cemetery was discontinued
circa AD 400.

early in the first millennium BC.

**SYNONYMS** Psychopompus;

Oneicopompus;

HERMES (Greek); Mercury.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Circus Maximus (Rome).

**Mes An Du**

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and carvings.

God. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-LITERARY SOURCES *Aeneid*
(Virgil), etc.

Akkadian). Probably an alternative title for the sun god (see SˇAMASˇ).

One of the twelve major deities of Olympus, Mercury is modeled closely
on the Greek god Hermes.

In Roman mythology he is the son of JUPITER and **Mes Lam Taea**

the plains goddess MAIA, born in a cave on Mount God of war.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Baby-Cyllene in Arcadia. He is attributed
with the lonian-Akkadian). An aggressive aspect of the invention of the
lyre made from a tortoise shell, and chthonic underworld god NERGAL.
Often linked with various misdemeanors, including the theft of with the
god LUGAL-IRRA.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p212}**Mictlantecuhtli** 197

**Messor**

**Mhalsa**

Minor god of agriculture. Roman. Concerned Minor goddess. Hindu (late).
The consort of with the growth and harvesting of crops.

KHANDOBA and considered to be a form of the goddess PARVATI. Locally
worshiped at Jejuri, near Poona in western India.

**Meter**

Mother goddess, Greek. The essence of the great mother of all gods,
equating most closely to GAIA.

**Micapetlacoli**

*(dead mat chest)*

Known throughout the Greek Empire and gen-Minor chthonic underworld
goddess. Aztec (clas-erally the object of devotion by individuals rather
sical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group than large cult
followings. Also known as *Meter* of deities belonging to the
MICTLANTECUHTLI *oriae* (mother of the mountain). Her popularity is
complex.

thought to have spread from northern Ionia.

Herodotus mentions a festival of Meter in Kyzikos. Probably derived
originally from the **Michi-No-Kami**

western Asiatic great mother (see KYBELE).

Gods of passage. Shinto \[Japan\]. The generic name for three KAMIS
associated with roads and crossroads. They also protect the boundaries
**Metis**

of house and environs and may be known as Goddess of wisdom. Greek. The
daughter of Yakushin gods, guardians against plague. See OKEANOS and
TETHYS. The original consort of KUNADO. Also Chiburi-No-Kami.

ZEUS and mother of ATHENA. According to legend, Zeus swallowed her
because he feared she would engender a child more powerful than he.

**Mictecacihuatl**

Chthonic underworld god. Aztec (classical **Metsaka**

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of a pair of deities with M

Moon goddess. Huichol Indian (Mesoamerican) ICTLANTECUHTLI. In the
primeval waters of the cosmos, they generated the monstrous

\[Mexico\]. Known as "grandmother moon," she is goddess C

the consort of the fire god T

IPACTLI, from whom the earth was ATEVALI. She guards

formed.

the Huichol against the god of death, TOKAKAMI.

**Metztli**

**Mictlantecuhtli**

Minor moon god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Chthonic underworld god.
Aztec (classical

\[Mexico\]. One of the group of deities belonging Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. The creator of the to the TEZCATLIPOCA complex.

underworld, Mictlan. Depicted with a skull-like appearance and
protruding teeth. Also one of a pair of deities with MICTECACIHUATL. In
the **Mexitli**

*(maguey-hare)*

primeval waters of the cosmos, they generated Minor god of war. Aztec
(classical Mesoameri-the monstrous goddess CIPACTLI, from whom the can)
\[Mexico\]. One of the group of deities earth was formed. In alternative
traditions he is belonging to the HUITZILPOCHTLI complex.

the god of the sixth of the thirteen heavens,

[]{#index_split_004.html#p213}198 **Midir**

Ilhuicatl Mamalhuazocan (the heaven of the fire **Mi-Kura-Tana-No-Kami**

*(august store-*

drill), or he is one of the gods who support the *house chief kami)*

lowest heaven at the four cardinal points. Mict-House god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of a number of lantecuhtli is perceived to reside in the
south domestic guardian KAMIS *,* he is particularly con-

(codices *Borgia* and *Vaticanus B*) *.* He is also one of cerned with
the protection of storehouses.

the four great temple deities (codices *Borgia, Cospi* and
*Fejervery-Mayer*) *.*

**Milkastart**

Local tutelary god. Western Semitic. Known only **Midir**

from Umm el-Ammed where his cult apparently Chthonic god. Celtic
(Irish). Appears in poly-co-existed with that of BAAL SAPON. One of two
morphic form. According to legend the consort of major temples built at
Umm el-Ammed in the Etain and ruler of the land of Mag Mor. He lost
third century BC was probably dedicated to an eye when hit by a hazel
wand; the eye was MILKASTART, and the name is regarded as a syn-replaced
by DIANCECHT, the physician god. In cretization of MELQART and ASTARTE.

Roman times he became more of an underworld deity. Also Mider.

**Milkom**

Tutelary god. Western Semitic (Ammonite). One **Mihos**

of the deities mentioned in the *Vetus Testamentum* Lion god. Egyptian.
The son of the goddess (1 Kings 11.5) as being worshiped by the
Israelite BASTET. Depicted in leonine form and originat-king Solomon.
Also Milcom.

ing from a cult center at Leontopolis \[Tell el'-

Muqdam\] in Lower Egypt. A sanctuary in his honor was built at Bubastis.
Also Miysis (Greek).

**Mi-Lo Fo**

God. Chinese Buddhist. The local name given to the BODHISATTVA MAITREYA.
Like the Indian **Mika-Hiya-Hi**

*(terrible swift sun)*

model he is represented as a rubicund figure.

Sun god. Shinto \[Japan\]. A deity subservient to Attributes include
roses and a purse.

the sun goddess AMATERASU and engendered from the blood of the fire
*KAMI* KAGU-TSUCHI.

Certain Japanese still worship the sun, going **MIMIR**

outside in the morning, facing east, bowing and **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic). God of wisdom and clapping their hands in a daily ritual.

inspiration.

*See also* HI-HIYA-HI.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period (circa AD 700) and possibly
earlier until Christianization (circa AD 1100). **SYNONYMS** Mimr; Mimi;
Mim.

**Mikal**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none known.

Local god. Western Semitic (Phoenician). The **ART REFERENCES** none
known, but possibly the cult was followed strongly on Cyprus. Some
subject of anonymous carvings.

authorities believe he was invoked as a plague **LITERARY SOURCES**
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* god.

(Snorri).

[]{#index_split_004.html#p214}**MINERVA** 199

An AESIR god who lives in the world of the Frost serrated cones
projecting horizontally from a disc.

Giants. He guards the well of knowledge, filled by His sacred animal is
probably a white bull and he a spring which flows beneath the World
Tree, is also associated with the tall lettuce species ( *Lac-Yggdrasil,
and which is supplied from the *tuca sativa*), the shape of which may be
reminis-primeval waters. The god OTHIN drank from the cent of an erect
phallus.*

spring to acquire knowledge, having forfeited one By the end of the
second millennium, Min had of his eyes to Mimir. Said to be the wisest
among become partly syncretized with Horus as a god the gods. According
to some sources he was sent Min-Horus. Min is also a guardian deity of
mines, as hostage to the VANIR in their war with the Aesir hence his
cult centers at Qift and Akhim, which and was killed by them (see
Othin). Some authors were bases for gold-mining expeditions. Temple
argue that he is more properly a giant than a god.

buildings at both sites are only known from the Said to be accompanied
often by the silent god Greco-Roman period. Min was celebrated as part
HOENIR. Mimir warns Othin of the final of the coronation rites of a
ruler in Egypt, thus onslaught at Ragnarok (doom).

ensuring the sexual vigor and fertility of the new pharaoh. The festival
is found depicted at Thebes in association with Rameses II and III. At
the time Min was frequently presented with offerings of **MIN**

flowers and sacred lettuces.

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Fertility god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC until the end of Egyptian
history (circa AD 400).

**Minaksi**

*(fish eyed)*

**SYNONYMS** Menu (Egyptian).

Local fish goddess. Hindu. Regarded as a SAKTI **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Qift at the western end of of SˇIVA (i.e. PARVATI) and the daughter of
KUBERA.

the Wadi Hammamat, lying between Luxor She is the mother of Ugra.
Minaksi is known and Qena; Akhmim, north of Qena.

mainly from southern India where one of her **ART REFERENCES** sculpture
including fragmented main temples is at Madurai.

limestone colossi from Qift dating from 3000

BC or earlier; stone reliefs, wall paintings, etc.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid Texts, coffin texts, **Minato-No-Kami**

etc.

God of river mouths and estuaries. Shinto

\[Japan\]. The son of IZANAGI and IZANAMI and Min is the most
significant deity in the Egyptian father of the heavenly and earthly
water dividers.

pantheon in respect of sexual virility. In some genealogies he is the
son of ISIS, in others he represents Isis's consort with HORUS as their
child.

**MINERVA**

Min is depicted in anthropomorphic form wear-ORIGIN Roman. Goddess of
war.

ing a modius bearing two plumes and a hanging **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 400 BC until ribbon. He is generally drawn in profile,
legs AD 400.

together and with his left arm raised into the **SYNONYMS** PALLAS,
ATHENA (Greek).

angle made by his royal flail. The most obvious **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
main Capitoline temple feature of the iconography is a strongly erect
shared with JUPITER and JUNO, also an impor-penis. Min is represented in
older art by two tant sanctuary on the Esquiline (see Athena).

[]{#index_split_004.html#p215}200 **Minos**

**ART REFERENCES** depicted with Juno and Jupiter **ART REFERENCES**
various sculptures and reliefs.

on the Great Arch of Trajan at Beneventum **LITERARY SOURCES** *Avesta.*

erected in AD 115; frequently appearing on sarcophagi offering new life
beyond the grave.

Originating in India, Mithra is a god of light who *See also* ATHENA.

was translated into the attendant of the god **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Aeneid* (Virgil), etc.

AHURA MAZDA in the light religion of Persia; from this he was adopted as
the Roman deity Minerva is probably derived from an Etruscan Mithras. He
is not generally regarded as a sky goddess Menrva but later becomes
modeled on god but a personification of the fertilizing power the Greek
goddess ATHENA. Like the latter, she of warm, light air. According to
the *Avesta*, he sprang fully armed from the head of JUPITER

possesses 10,000 eyes and ears and rides in a char-

(ZEUS), whose head had been cleaved with Vul-iot drawn by white horses.

can's ax. As Minerva Medica she is the tutelary In dualistic
Zoroastrianism, which effectively goddess of Rome. She is perceived
variously as demoted him, Mithra is concerned with the end-goddess of
war and peace, but also of wisdom and less battle between light and dark
forces; he rep-the arts and crafts including needlework. Annual resents
truth. He is responsible for the keeping festivals in her honor included
the *Minervalia* and of oaths and contracts. He was born from a rock
*Quinquatria* (March 19-23) at which the Palla-and, according to legend,
engaged in a primeval dium statue which had allegedly fallen from
struggle with Ahura Mazda's first creation, a wild Olympus was carried
in procession.

bull, which he subdued and confined to a cave.

The bull escaped, but was recaptured by Mithra, who slit its throat.
From the blood sprang plant **Minos**

life on earth. His chief adversary is AHRIMAN, Minor underworld god.
Greco-Roman. A son of the power of darkness. Mithra is not generally
Zeus and Europa. The mythical king of Crete.

worshiped on his own, but as an integral part of One of three judges of
the dead souls entering the Mithraic worship of Ahura Mazda, where he
Hades. His cult is linked with the worship of bulls.

acts as an intercessor between gods and men. In the Hellenic period he
was transformed more closely to the role of a sun god.

**Mirsa**

*See also* AHURA MAZDA.

God of light. Pre-Christian Caucasus region.

Probably derived from the Persian god MITHRA.

Also the deity responsible for fire.

**Mithras**

God of soldiers. Greco-Roman. Derived from the Indian-Persian model. He
became particularly **MITHRA**

*(friend)*

prominent among military people throughout the **ORIGIN** Persian
\[Iran\]. God of the upper air.

Roman Empire during the first and second cen-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 400 BC to turies AD, as a god symbolizing loyalty and truth.

AD 200.

The cult was performed in an underground tem-SYNONYMS MITRA (Hindu);
MITHRAS (Roman).

ple, the *mithraeum,* and involved the sacrifice of a **CENTER(S) OF
CULT** throughout area of Persian bull. Mithraism, under Roman
influence, was an influence.

exclusively male cult.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p216}**Moccus** 201

**Miti**

to tradition, the sun god TEZCATLIPOCA trans-Maternal spirit. Koryak
\[southeastern Siberia\].

formed himself into MIXCOATL-CAMAXTLI to The consort of QUIKINNA'QU.
According to tra-make fire by twirling the sacred fire sticks.

dition her father is twilight man, Gi'thililan, who deserted her when
she was very young. She is regarded as the mother of the Koryak people,
**Mizu-Ha-No-Me**

whose immediate sons and daughters are Water goddess. Shinto \[Japan\].
The senior water EME'MQUT, NA'NQA-KA'LE, YINE'ANE'UT and deity who was
engendered from the urine of the Cana'ina'ut.

primordial creator goddess Izanami during her fatal illness, having been
burned producing the fire god HI-NO-KAGU-TSUCHI.

**Mi-Toshi-No-Kami**

*(the august harvest*

*kami)*

Agricultural god. Shinto \[Japan\]. The offspring of **Mkulumncandi**

O-TOSHI-NO-KAMI, the harvest god of rice, and Creator god. Swazi
\[Swaziland, South Africa\].

Kagayo-Hime (refulgent princess), he is in charge There is no worship of
this deity, though he is of crops other than rice.

known as the "great first one."

**Mitra**

*(friend)*

**Mlentengamunye**

*(one leg)*

Minor sun god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). An Messenger god. Swazi
\[Swaziland, South Africa\].

Aditya, one of six descendants of ADITI, he was The intermediary between
mankind and the originally associated with VARUNA (Vedic), creator god
MKULUMNCANDI.

ruling the day while Varuna ruled the night. It is from this model that
first MITHRA (Persian) and then MITHRAS (Roman) were derived. He
**Mlk-Amuklos**

is also the god of intimate friendship. Attrib-Heroic god. Western
Semitic \[Syrio-Palestine\]

utes: two lotuses, trident and a sacrificial drink and Cyprus. Known
from inscriptions circa 1100

or *soma*.

BC and possibly one of the original pre-Hellenic models from which
APOLLO was derived.

**Mi-Wi-No-Kami**

God of wells. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of three deities **Mnemosyne**

responsible for wells, worshiped jointly in the MiGoddess of memory.
Greek. A consort of ZEUS

Wi-Jinja shrine. He is particularly the god of and mother of the
legendary nine Muses of domestic wells.

Helicon.

**Mixcoatl-Camaxtli**

*(cloud serpent)*

**Moccus**

God of war. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-Local swine god.
Romano-Celtic (Continental ico\]. Also a deity of hunting and fire who
received European). Assimilated with Mercury.

human sacrifice of captured prisoners. According *See also* MERCURIUS.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p217}202 **Modimo**

**Modimo**

**Mokos**

Universal god. Tswana \[Botswana, South Africa\]. A Goddess of
fertility. Pre-Christian Slavonic monotheistic deity possibly, though
not with cer-European. Identified in the *Nestor Chronicle* as a tainty,
influenced by Christianity. Not specifically goddess of midwifery. Her
cult was taken over by a creator god, since the universe and MODIMO have
that of the Virgin Mary.

"always been." Perceived as the river of existence which flows endlessly
through space and time. He rules the light and dark opposites in the
universe, **Molek**

as well as the proper order of life on earth.

God. Western Semitic (Ammonite). Synonymous with the god Moloch (Hebrew)
of the *Vetus* *Testamentum* to whom Israelite children were **Modron**

*(another)*

sacrificed by burning (1 Kings 11.7 and 2 Kings Mother goddess. Celtic
(Welsh). The mother of 23.10)

MABON, whom she subsequently loses. Her cult is closely linked with that
of Mabon and she may originally have been one of the aspects of the
god-Moloch

See MOLEK.

dess(es) MORRIGAN. In Christian times some authors believe that she
became St. Madrun.

**Moma**

Creator god. Uitoto Indian \[South America\].

**Mogounos**

Originally the creator of mankind. When he was Local tribal deity.
Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Assim-slain he entered and ruled the underworld.
Also ilated with APOLLO.

the apotheosis of the moon.

**Mohini**

*(illusion)*

**Mombo Wa Ndhlopfu**

*(elephant face)*

Minor incarnation of VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and Tutelary god. Ronga
\[Mozambique, southern Puranic). Mohini is an *avatara* who appears in
the Africa\]. An ancestral deity who lives in and con-form of an
enchantress whose form Visňu adopted trols the forests, also appearing
in the guise of a briefly to deceive demons attempting to remove huge
snake. He is propitiated by the sacrifice of a the ambrosia created by
churning the primeval cockerel.

ocean of milk (see also GARUDA). Visňu used the same guise to dupe and
seduce the god SˇIVA.

**MON**

*(great god).*

**ORIGIN** Kafir \[Afghanistan---Hindukush\]. War-Moirai

rior god and hero.

Collective name for a group of goddesses. Greek.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from prehistoric The Fates of human life:
KLOTHO, the spinner, origins and persisting in certain localized parts
LACHESIS, the caster of lots, and ATROPOS, the today.

unturnable inevitability of death. The daughters **SYNONYMS** Mandi.

of ZEUS and THEMIS, depicted with spindle, scroll **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
chiefly at the village of and scales respectively. Also Moires.

Pashki and at Dewa (Prasun region), but also at

[]{#index_split_004.html#p218}**MORRIGAN** 203

numerous smaller sanctuaries throughout Kafir earlier, but came to
special prominence oversee-region.

ing the aggressive posture of Theban kings from **ART REFERENCES**
wooden sculptures.

the XI to XVIII Dynasty (2133-1320 BC). Montu **LITERARY SOURCES**
Robertson G.S. *The Kafirs of* is depicted in human form but with a
falcon's *the Hindukush* (1896) *,* Morgenstierne G. *Some* head
surmounted by twin plumes, a sun disc and *Kati Myths and Hymns* (1951)
*.*

the *uraeus* (cobra). At some stage, probably as Month (Greek), he
became identified with a Mon is a senior deity in the Kafir pantheon who
sacred bull, Buchis.

challenges and defends mankind against demons and giants. He is the
first offspring of the creator god Imra. He is also a weather god who
controls **Mor**

clouds and mist. Mon is perceived as a deity of Sun goddess. Celtic
(Irish). The progenitrix of vast size and vigor who creates glaciers
with his the royal lineage of the kings of Munster.

footprints. He is also a god of flowing water.

Some legends place him as a creator of mankind and law-giver, but only
mirroring the actions of **Morpheus**

the supreme creator IMRA. He appears as a medi-Minor god of dreams.
Greek. The son of HYPNOS, ator between heaven and earth.

there is no record of worship of this deity.

Mon is depicted, in wood, either in human form carrying a golden bow and
quiver made by his brother Kshibere, or as a humped bull.
Alterna-MORRIGAN

*(queen of demons)*

tively he is represented by a standing stone slab **ORIGIN** Celtic
(Irish). War, fertility and vegeta-with two attendant smaller stones.

tion goddess.

According to legend, when the giants locked up **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** from prehistoric the sun and moon in a gold house, Mon turned
origins until Christianization (circa AD 400).

himself into a child and in this guise was pro-SYNONYMS MACHA (Ulster);
Medb or MAEVE

tected by a giantess mother. After many attempts (Connaught); Etain
Echraide (Tara); also to break into the house, he succeeded, restored
probably Badb Catha; ERIU; Fodla; Nemain; the sun and moon to their
place in the heavens RHIANNON.

and assisted Imra in the creation of mankind.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** various sanctuaries throughout Ireland.

**ART REFERENCES** inscriptions and carvings on **Moneta**

Romano-Celtic altars, stone pillars, etc.

Minor goddess of prosperity. Roman. The spirit **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions; Cycles of* of the mint, known particularly from the
second *Kings.*

century BC.

A complex goddess displaying various characteristics which are both
generative and destructive (see **Montu**

also ANAT, INANA, ISŤAR, ATHENE). At the festival Local god of war.
Egyptian. Worshiped in and of *Samain,* she mates with the DAGDA to
ensure around the district of Thebes in Upper Egypt.

the future prosperity of the land and as Queen He is known from circa
2000 BC and possibly Maeve (Medb) of Connaught she was ritually

[]{#index_split_004.html#p219}204 **Mors**

wedded to the mortal king whose antecedent was **Morta**

Ailill. As Nemain (panic) and Badb Catha (raven of Goddess of death.
Roman. In later Roman times battle), she takes on a more warlike and
destructive she becomes linked with the birth goddesses aspect. Rather
than engaging directly in conflict, DECIMA and NONA, as a trio of
goddesses of fate, she uses her supernatural powers to spread fear the
*PARCAE.*

and disarray. The Irish hero Cu Chulainn was thus visited on the battle
field by BADB driving a chariot and dressed in a red cloak and with red
eye-Morva

brows presenting an intimidating appearance. She Sky spirits. Andaman
Islands \[Sea of Bengal\].

is capable of changing her shape into various ani-Invisible but thought
to be of human form.

mal forms and in the guise of a raven or a crow is able to foretell the
outcome of battle.

Morrigan is also closely associated with horse **Morvran**

*(sea crow)*

symbolism, befitting a horse-oriented culture Local god of war. Celtic
(Welsh). The son of with strong links east toward Asia. Mare forms
CERIDWEN and TEGID FOEL. Legend has it that the basis of the names Macha
and Medb. She may he was extremely ugly and that his mother tried to
also at times have been syncretized with the horse imbue him with wisdom
by preparing a special goddess EPONA. As with other Celtic goddesses
brew of inspiration. It was drunk by Gwion.

Morrigan is an intrinsic part of the land rather Morvran was invincible
in battle because his than a tribal deity, the "Sovereignty of Ireland."

enemies thought him a demon.

The Celtic goddess is frequently described as a triad of separate
aspects. Hence Morrigan, Nemain and Badb are linked and become
collec-MOT

*(death)*

tively the *Morrigna* (see also MATRES). In associ-ORIGIN Canaanite and
Phoenician \[northern ation with the vitality of Irish kings, Morrigan
Israel, Lebanon and Syrian coastal regions\].

assumed the appearance both of a young girl and God of natural
adversity.

of a hag, the latter signalling the banishment or **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** from prehistoric slaughter of a ruler who had become infirm or
times until circa 200 BC.

otherwise scarred with signs of mortality.

**SYNONYMS** Muth (Phoenician).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** possibly Byblos.

**ART REFERENCES** none known.

**Mors**

**LITERARY SOURCES** Ugaritic texts from Ras Minor god of death. Roman.
Mors replaces the Sˇamra; Philon of Byblos; inscriptions.

Greek THANATOS and, according to legend, is one of the twin sons of NYX,
goddess of the night.

Mot is the Canaanite representation of adversity in He lives in part of
the remote cave occupied by the natural world. He lives in a pit within
the earth SOMNUS, god of sleep, beside the river Lethe.

and is responsible for its annual death from drought Ovid depicts him as
a hideous and cadaverous fig-and heat: "he has scorched the olive, the
produce of ure dressed in a winding sheet and holding a the earth and
the fruit of the trees." He engages in scythe and hour glass. Known
particularly the classic confrontation with the Canaanite hero through
Lacedaemonian culture where twin stat-and national god, BAAL. Though the
duel results in ues of Mors and Somnus were placed side by side.

Baal's demise, his death is avenged by his twin

[]{#index_split_004.html#p220}**Mujaji** 205

sister ANAT, who slays Mot, then cleaves, winnows, **dMu-bDud Kam-Po
Sa-Zan**

burns and grinds him with a millstone, in what Sky god. Bon \[Tibet\].
The head of the ancient appears to be a ritual allied to the sowing of
seed pantheon in the Bon religion.

and harvesting (see OSIRIS). Baal is later restored.

The conflict probably formed the basis of an annual ritual drama at the
Canaanite New Year **Mucalinda**

which was held in the autumn. In the texts Mot is Tutelary god.
Buddhist. The guardian of a lake the son of Il and his mother is ASĚRAH
(ATHIRAT).

near Bodh Gaya. He is identified as a king of the *nagas* or snake gods
and is said to have protected the BUDDHA from a storm by coiling around
him.

**Moyocoyani**

*(maker of himself)*

Minor god of universal power. Aztec (classical **Mugasa**

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group of Sky god. Pigmy \[central
Africa\]. Originally he deities known as the TEZCATLIPOCA complex.

headed a paradise land in which the first human beings lived. They
disobeyed him, however, by **Mratna'irgin**

entering his hut where he resided unseen, after *(right-hand dawn)*

which he left them and made them mortal. He is Spirit of the dawn.
Chukchee \[eastern Siberia\].

not worshiped in any conventional sense. Also One of four beings
responsible for the dawn in Mugu.

different directions.

*See also* TNE'SGAN, LIETNA'IRGIN and NA'CHITNA'IRGIN.

**Mugizi**

Lake god. Bunyoro \[Uganda, East Africa\]. The guardian deity of Lake
Albert, invoked with offer-Mrgasiras

*(head of a gazelle)*

ings by those wishing to cross the lake in boats.

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A benevolent
*NAKSATRA;* daughter of DAKSA, wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Muhingo**

God of war. Bunyoro \[Uganda, East Africa\].

Invoked specifically by warriors before entering **Mu Gong**

battle.

God of immortality. Taoist (Chinese). The personification of the
principle of Yang and the consort of Xi-Wang-Mu. He lives in the east,
she in the west.

**Mujaji**

*See also* HSI WANG MU.

Rain goddess. Lovedu \[South Africa\]. She is said to reside in the
northern Drakensberg Mountains and sends both destructive tempests and
gentle gener-Muati

ative rain. In past times she was propitiated with Obscure local god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

sacrifices of cattle and occasionally young girls. She Associated in
some texts with the mythical island is represented by a lineage of
mortal queens on paradise of Dilmun, he becomes syncretized whose
fabulous reputation the author Rider Hag-with NABU.

gard based the novel *She.* Also Modjadji.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p221}206 **Mukasa**

**Mukasa**

and may have a purifying function. Their main Supreme god. Buganda
\[Uganda, East Africa\]. A sanctuaries are the Sumiyoshi Taisha in Osaka
benevolent deity whose main oracular sanctuary and the Munakata-Taisha.

was sited on the island of Bubembe, Lake Victoria. His first high priest
was Semagunga and, by convention, only the tribal leader was permitted
**Mungan Ngour**

to consult with the oracle there. Mukasa provides Creator god.
Australian aboriginal. Chiefly rain, food and cattle.

revered among the Kurnai Koori aborigines in Victoria State. The
Southern Lights or *Aurora* *australis* are regarded as a sign of his
displeasure **Mula**

when the law and order given to humankind by Minor goddess of fortune.
Hindu (Epic and the gods are abused. His son is Tundun, who is Puranic).
A malevolent *NAKSATRA*; daughter of responsible for the secret
ceremonies originally DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

divulged only to men and including the initiation rights of passage from
boyhood to maturity.

When these were revealed to women, the **Mulindwa**

Dreamtime ended, a period of chaos ensued Guardian goddess. Bunyoro
\[Uganda, East and Mungan Ngour elected to live henceforth Africa\]. The
tutelary protector of the tribal chiefs in the sky.

and their families constituting the royal clan.

**Mungu**

**Mulliltu**

Creator god. Swahili \[East Africa\]. The name Goddess. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian).

applied to the notion of a single god in the heav-The consort of ELLIL
(ENLIL) and of ASSUR. She ens, influenced by the spread of Christianity.
Also derives from the Sumerian goddess NINLIL.

Mulungu.

**Mullo**

**Munisvara**

Mule god. Romano-Celtic. Known from inscrip-Deified saint. Hindu.
Technically a demigod but tions and apparently associated with the god
worshiped as a deity by Dravidians in southern MARS.

India. Also Municami (Tamil).

**Munakata-No-Kami**

**Munjem Malik**

Sea gods. Shinto \[Japan\]. A group of three KAMIS, Chthonic or earth
god. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. He generally identified as the
SUMIYOSHI-NO-KAMI, appears as a rival and possible predecessor of who
protect seafarers, including fishermen. They the god IMRA, but one whose
realm is in are the subject of special worship by the Jíngu-the earth
rather than the sky. Imra controls Kogo sect, whom they escorted to
Korea in dis-mountains and high pastures. Munjem Malik tant times. They
are also tutelary deities of poets rules the earth of the valleys. He
presides over

[]{#index_split_004.html#p222}**Mutinus** 207

the council of gods. His main sanctuary was at **Muso Koroni**

*(the pure woman with the*

Arte in the Parun valley where a large boulder *primeval soul)*

represented his head.

Chthonic fertility goddess. Bambara \[Mali, West Africa\]. The mother of
all living things, she introduced mankind to the principles of
**Munume**

farming. She has a terrifying appearance, God of weather. Bunyoro
\[Uganda, East Africa\].

depicted either in human form, sometimes Invoked during times of drought
or deluge with many breasts (cf. ARTEMIS at Ephesus), or and propitiated
by means of sacrifice, usually as a panther. In the latter guise she
uses her an ox from the tribal chief and sheep or fowl claws to bring on
menstruation in women from the villagers. The blood is sprinkled on and
to circumcise both sexes. Prior to circum-the floor of the sanctuary and
the flesh is eaten cision a youth is said to possess *wanzo,* an at the
door.

untamed wildness. Muso Koroni is pursued by the sun god, PEMBA, who
impregnates her in the form of a tree ( *Acacia albida*) *.* Also Mousso
**Muraja**

Coronie.

Goddess of music. Buddhist. Deification of a kind of large drum or
tambourine. Color: smoky.

Attribute: tambourine.

**Mut**

The patron goddess of Thebes. Egyptian. In Upper Egypt she is the
counterpart of SAKHMET, **Murukan**

the Lower Egyptian goddess from Memphis.

Hunting and war god. Dravidian and Tamil After superseding the goddess A

\[southern India\]. Identified with the Hindu god MAUNET, she

became locally the consort of the sun god A S

MUN,

KANDA. His vehicle is an elephant or a peacock.

Color: red. Attributes: spear and staff with gar-in which capacity she
is the mother of the moon land.

god KHONSU. She was also regarded as the divine mother of the Theban
kings. Mut is depicted in human form wearing a vulture headdress
sur-Musdamma

mounted by the twin crowns of Upper and God of buildings. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian).

Lower Egypt. She is typically dressed in a bright Described as the
"great builder of ENLIL," Mus-red or blue patterned gown. Less
frequently she damma is a minor deity appointed by the god is drawn with
a lion's head. She enjoyed a cult ENKI to take responsibility for
building projects center at Thebes where her sanctuary was known and for
houses.

as the Iseru.

**Musisi**

**Mutinus**

Messenger god. Ndonga \[Namibia, southwest Minor fertility god. Roman.
Depicted as strongly Africa\]. The intercessor between the creator god
ithyphallic and invoked by women seeking to bear KALUNGA and mankind.
His father is Kalunga.

children.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p223}208 **Muttalamman** **Muttalamman**

*(pearl-mother)*

**Myoken-Bodhisattva**

Plague goddess. Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern Astral god. Buddhist
Chinese. The apotheosis of India\]. Specifically identified with
smallpox. Also the Pole Star, equating with AME-NO-KAGASE-Mutyalamma.

WO in Japanese Shintoism.

**Mylitta**

**Myrrha**

Goddess. Greek. The Hellenized version of the Fertility goddess. Western
Semitic (Phoenician).

Akkadian goddess MULLILTU, consort of ELLIL

Known from inscriptions as the mother of the and of ASSUR.

god Kinnur. Also Syyrna.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p224}N

6

**NA CHA**

*(here is a loud cry)*

ited with the mission of ridding the world of **ORIGIN** Taoist
(Chinese). Guardian god.

evil, but he himself attacks the guardians of **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 300 until both Taoist and Buddhist temples and can
only present.

be defended against by Li Ch'ing, the first min-SYNONYMS Li No Cha.

ister of heaven. He is also titled "grand marshal **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
throughout Chinese culture.

of the skies" and "guardian of the gates of **ART REFERENCES** paintings
and sculptures.

heaven."

**LITERARY SOURCES** various philosophical and He is depicted surrounded
by a red aura, with religious texts, mostly inadequately researched a
white face and wearing red silk trousers which and untranslated.

emanate a dazzling golden radiance. His attributes include a bracelet on
the right wrist. Origi-A somewhat ambiguous god who is generally nally
he also carried a thunderbolt, but when his regarded as benevolent, but
whose traditions hint name changed to Li No Cha, circa AD 1420, this at
a more destructive aspect. He was *born* a god of attribute changed to a
pagoda.

human parents, the reincarnation of an older deity, Ling Chu-Tzu, the
"intelligent pearl."

According to tradition, his father was Li Ching, **Na Ngutu**

who threatened to kill his mother because she God of the dead. West and
central African. Essen-claimed she was made pregnant by the mystical
tially the guardian deity of warriors slain in battle.

actions of a Taoist priest who told her she was to bear the child of a
unicorn. Na Cha is said to have fought in the Shang-Chou war on the side
of the **Nabu**

Chou dynasty circa 1027 BC. His chief adversary God of writing and
wisdom. Mesopotamian was the sea dragon king. Ultimately he became
(Babylonian-Akkadian). The son of MARDUK and involved with the goddess
Shih-Chi Niang ZARPANITU(M), his consort is TASMETU(M). He is Niang,
accidentally killed her attendant and, in symbolized by the inscribing
stylus. A major deity remorse, committed suicide.

in neo-Babylonian times from the eighth century Na Cha is the tutelary
god of Yung Lo, the BC onward, with an important sanctuary at Bor-third
emperor of the Ming Dynasty, and is cred-sippa, near Babylon, known as
the Ezida. He is 209

[]{#index_split_004.html#p225}210 **Na'chitna'irgin** considered a god
of mountain regions, described *nagual* generally takes the form of an
animal and as the "firstborn son of Marduk" and his image is it may be
adopted either by a mortal being or by closely involved in the New Year
*akitu* festival.

another deity.

Also NEBO ( *Vetus Testamentum*) *.*

**Nahi**

**Na'chitna'irgin**

*(genuine dawn)*

Guardian god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

Spirit of the dawn. Chukchee \[eastern Siberia\].

Generally of benevolent nature.

One of four beings responsible for the different directions of the dawn.
The brother of WU'SQUUS, spirit of darkness.

**Nahui Ehecatl**

*See also* TNE'SGAN, MRATNA'IRGIN and LIET-Minor water god. Aztec
(classical mesoamerican) NA'IRGIN.

\[Mexico\]. One of the group of deities belonging to the TLALOC complex.
Also (4)Ehecatl.

**Nachunde**

Sun god. Elamite \[Iran\].

**Nahui Ollin**

*(earthquake sun)*

Creator god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. According to most of the codices, at **Nagakumara**

the time of the Spanish conquest there had been God. Jain \[India\]. One
of the groups under the four previous world ages, each represented by a
general title of BHAVANAVASI (dwelling in places).

sun and terminated by a cataclysm. Ollin, the fifth They have a youthful
appearance and are associ-sun, was created at Teotihuacan and at the
con-ated with rain and thunder.

quest was just under 2,000 years old. It is presided over by the god
TONATIUH. Each creation is considered to last 2028 x 52 terrestrial
years and the **Nagaraja**

present one is destined to be destroyed by a great Snake god. Hindu. The
generic title of a deity earthquake. Tradition has it that Ollin was
origi-equating with the terms *mahoraga* (great serpent) nally a sickly
or humble deity named NANAHUATL

or *nagadeva.* Such deities were worshiped in India (the diseased one).
Also (4)Ollin; Ollintonatiuh.

as early as the Indus Valley civilization (prior to 1700 BC).

**Nai**

God of the ocean. Gan \[Accra, Ghana, West **Nagini**

Africa\]. The second-in-command to the supreme Goddess. Jain \[India\].
The counterpart of the god ATAA NAA NYONGMO. His eldest daughter is
Hindu goddess MANASA.

the goddess ASHIAKLE.

**Nagual**

**Naiades**

Tutelary deity. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Animistic water spirits.
Greco-Roman. Female

\[Mexico\]. A generic name for a personal god. A personalities assigned
the guardianship of

[]{#index_split_004.html#p226}**NAMMU** 211

fresh waters by the great gods, and invoked **Naksatra(s)**

locally at sacred pools and springs. They were Generic title for a group
of astral goddesses.

also regarded as minor patrons of music and Hindu. Stars or
constellations which became per-poetry.

sonified as deities, accounted as twenty-seven daughters of DAKSA and
consorts of CANDRA or SOMA. They can exert benign or evil influence.

**Naigameya**

God. Hindu. Either the son or the brother of the god SKANDA. Generally
depicted with the head of **Namasangiti**

( *the chanting of the name)*

a goat.

God. Buddhist. A form of AVALOKITESVARA, but also a distinct emanation
of VAIROCANA. The personification of a sacred text. He stands upon a
**Na'ininen**

lotus. Color: white. Attributes: club, lotus, sword, Creator being.
Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

half-staff and waterjar.

Known as "outer one," or "world," he is perceived as a remote but
benevolent spirit comparable to **NAMMU**

the Supreme Being, TA'YAN. Also Na'rninen **ORIGIN** Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Babylon-

(Chukchee).

ian-Akkadian) \[Iraq\]. Chthonic creator and birth goddess.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 4000 BC until **Nai-No-Kami**

circa 1750 BC.

Earthquake god. Shinto \[Japan\]. One of the RAI-SYNONYMS none.

JIN deities responsible for thunder, storms and **CENTER(S) OF WORSHIP**
mainly identified with Ur.

rain. His worship began in AD 599.

**ART REFERENCES** stele of Ur-Nammu (circa 2050-1950 BC), etc.

**LITERARY SOURCES** creation epics, including *Enki* **Nainuema**

*and the World Order;* Sumerian and Akkadian Creator god. Uitoto Indian
\[South America\]. He temple hymns and poems.

created the earth from his own imagination and stamped upon it until it
was flat. He then engen-Nammu is identified in various texts as the
god-dered the forests and other living things from his dess of the
watery deeps. As a consort of AN she saliva.

is the mother of ENKI and the power of the riverbed to produce water.
Alternatively Nammu is the progenitrix of An and KI, the archetypal
**Nairamata**

*(no soul)*

deities of heaven and earth. She also engendered Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An emanation of other early gods and in one poem is the
mother of AKSOBHYA. A SAKTI of HERUKA and a personifi-all mortal life.
She molded clay collected by crea-cation of knowledge. She bears five or
six arms in tures called *sig-en-sig-du* and brought it to life,
different gestures and often stands upon a corpse.

thus creating mankind. She is attended by seven Color: blue or black.
Attributes: arrows, club, cup minor goddesses and may ultimately have
become and knife. Three-eyed.

syncretized with NINHURSAG˜A.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p227}212 **Namtar**

**Namtar** *(fate)*

**Nanaja**

Messenger god(dess). Mesopotamian (Sumer-Fertility goddess. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-ian). A go-between and either minister or Akkadian). She is
also a war goddess who became maid-servant of the underworld goddess
syncretized with the Babylonian TASˇMETU.

ERESˇKIGAL, who brings death to mankind at the appropriate time.

**Nandi(n)**

*(rejoicing)*

Bull god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). Generally **Nana**

associated with SˇIVA as a bull-vehicle and an Mother goddess.
Pre-Christian Armenian. Her embodiment of fertility. Color: white. The
image cult became widespread and she may be equated usually stands in an
anteroom of the temple with the Phrygian goddess KYBELE.

guarding the place where the statue of Sˇiva is located. A Sˇiva devotee
touches the image's testi-cles on entry to a shrine. In anthropomorphic
**Nanabozho**

form he may be known as Nandisa.

Heroic god. Ojibwa \[Canada\]. A god of hunters who directly influences
the success or failure which determines whether individuals survive or
**Nang Lha**

perish. His brothers are the four winds which House god. Tibetan. A
personal family guardian exert changes in the seasons and weather.
Nan-depicted with the head of a pig. He is propitiated abozho gained
control over them to ensure good with libations.

hunting and fishing for the Ojibwa tribe.

**NANNA (1)** *(full moon)* **Nanahuatl**

*(rumor)*

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian) \[Iraq\]. Moon Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) god.

\[Mexico\]. In cosmogony, when on the fifth day **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC until of creation the gods sat in judgment to
elect the circa 1750 BC.

new sun god, Nanahuatl and TECCIZTECATL

**SYNONYMS** As-im-babbar (new light), Suen or cremated themselves in
the sacred fire. The SIN (crescent moon) (Akkadian).

heart of Nanahuatl ascended to become the new **CENTER(S) OF CULT** Ur.

sun and that of Tecciztecatl became the moon.

**ART REFERENCES** glyptics, etc.

Tradition suggests that Nanahuatl is diseased **LITERARY SOURCES**
creation epics including *Enki* and impoverished but of great courage,
while *and the World Order* and other texts.

Tecciztecatl is wealthy and a coward. In an alternative tradition, in
which Nanahuatl is the son A major astral deity in the Sumerian
pantheon, of QUETZALCOATL and Tecciztecatl is the son of probably
originating in very early pre-agricultural TLALOC, both deities are
hurled into the fire by times, Nanna is the tutelary god of Ur. He is
the their fathers.

firstborn son of ENLIL. His wife is NINGAL and he **NOTE:** eventually
all the gods sacrificed themis the father of the gods UTU and ISˇKUR and
of the selves so that mankind might be engendered from goddess INANA.
During the Third Dynasty of Ur, their remains. Also Nanahuatzin.

the New Year *akitu* festival was performed in his

[]{#index_split_004.html#p228}**Nara** 213

honor. He was considered to light up the night, to frequently holds a
pole surmounted by a dove-cote.

measure time and to provide fertility. He is In addition she carries the
cornucopia of a fertility depicted as traveling in a carriage across the
sky or mother goddess, but is also a domestic guardian bringing light to
the darkness.

deity and is often depicted with ravens, which may suggest further links
with the underworld.

**Nanna (2)**

Vegetation goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). The con-Napaeae

sort of Balder. According to some legends she Animistic spirits of
valleys. Greco-Roman.

died of a broken heart after BALDER was slain by Female personalities
assigned the guardianship HODER and went with him to HEL.

of fertile green valleys by the great gods and *See also* HODER.

invoked locally in small country shrines.

**Na'nqa-ka'le**

**Napir**

Guardian spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

Moon god. Elamite \[Iran\]. Known from inscrip-He is one of the sons of
QUIKINNA'QU and, tions.

according to tradition, sits in one place all the time painting his
belly. He is, nonetheless, perceived as a strong and heroic figure.

**Nappatecuhtli**

*(four-times lord)*

Minor god of mat-makers. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One
of the group of **Nansě**

deities belonging to the TLALOC complex gener-Goddess of justice.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian). A ally associated with rain, agriculture and
fertility.

daughter of ENKI (or EA), she is linked with the interpretation of
dreams. Mentioned sporadically in texts and most closely identified with
the city **Nappinnai**

of Lagasˇwith a cult center at Sirara, but also the Local goddess.
Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil). Con-subject of a highly ethical hymn from
Nippur.

sort of KRSNA. Mentioned in the Vaisnavite and Also Nasˇ, Nina.

Saivite literature, the Krsna-Nappinnai cult was prominent in
Tamil-speaking areas of southern India in the seventh to ninth
centuries. According **Nan-Sgrub**

*(the black one)*

to tradition Krsna wed Nappinnai after a bull-God. Buddhist \[Tibet\].
Possibly a counterpart of baiting contest during which he took on and
the Hindu god KALA. In Lamaism he is a form of defeated seven bulls.
Nappinnai may be a local-YAMA. He stands upon a man. Color: dark blue.

ized form of Sri-Laksmi. Also Pinnai.

Attributes: cup and knife.

**Nara**

*(man)*

**Nantosuelta**

*(winding river)*

Minor incarnation(s) of the god VISŇU. Hindu Goddess of water. Celtic
(Gallic). Identified as (Epic and Puranic). Some authorities place these
a possible consort of the god SUCELLOS. She as separate *avataras,* but
they are usually linked.

[]{#index_split_004.html#p229}214 **Narada**

Two of the sons of DHARMA, who was born from may also appear seated in a
yoga position with the the heart of BRAHMA, they spent a thousand years
goddess LAKSMI on his knee.

as severe ascetics in the Himalaya, where they were subject to various
temptations by INDRA.

They are described as sages. The texts depict **Narasinhi**

Nara colored green and bearing two hands, while Mother goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). A NARAYANA has four hands and is colored blue.

SAKTI of NARASINHA who is one of a group of They may also be paralleled
by HARI and Krsna.

ASTAMATARA mothers. In another grouping, one Also NARAYANA.

of nine NAVASAKTIS who, in southern India, rank higher than the
SAPTAMATARAS. Also CANDIKA.

**Narada**

*(giver of advice)*

Minor but popular deity. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and **Narayana**

Puranic). Narada is depicted as a sage who is also Creator god. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). More or a messenger and teacher. Born from the head,
or less synonymous with VISŇU, but specifically throat, of BRAHMA, and
alternatively a minor describing the embodiment of the "abode of
incarnation of VISŇU. In various roles he is a man." He is said to have
sucked his toe while sail-guardian deity of women, a musician and a
wan-ing the primeval ocean on a banana leaf, until his derer. Narada,
often bearded, is generally own inspiration created the world. Often
depicted depicted standing with the musical instrument supported by the
bird god GARUDA.

`</i>`{=html}

*which is his invention, the *vina* (lute). By con-See also* NARA.

trast to his benign nature he is also described as a

"maker of strife" and as "vile." Also Kali-karaka; Pisuna.

**Nareu**

Creator god. Melanesia \[Vanuatu\]. As in many comparable legends, he
created the world inside **Naradatta**

*(daughter of Nara)*

the shell of a mussel. He engendered a son from Goddess of learning.
Jain \[India\]. One of sixteen sand and water who, in turn, created the
sun and VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

moon from his father's eyes, rocks from his flesh and bones and mankind
from his spine.

**Narasinha**

*(man-lion)*

Incarnation of the god Visňu. Hindu (Epic and **Narisah**

Puranic). The fourth *avatara* of the god is Goddess of light.
Manichaean. The so-called depicted as a man-lion hybrid. According to
leg-

"virgin of the light," she may also be androgynous end, the demonic king
Hiranyakasipu had taken as the father of the virgins of light who equate
on a dangerous invulnerability. To thwart this, with the twelve zodiac
signs.

VISŇU took the form of Narasinha and hid inside a pillar of the king's
palace whence he sprang, capturing Hiranyakasipu and tearing out his
**Narkissos**

entrails. IconographicalIy, the scene is portrayed Minor god. Greek. The
son of the river god with the victim thrown across Narasinha's lap and
Kephissos, he wasted away after falling in love the god's claws plunged
into his body. Narasinha with his own image reflected in water. The gods

[]{#index_split_004.html#p230}**Nebethetpet** 215

took pity on him and changed him into the flower **Nayenezgani**

*(slayer of alien gods)*

of the same name. In Roman religion he becomes God of war. Navaho
\[USA\]. The most powerful Narcissus.

of the Navaho war gods. The son of the sun god TSOHANOAI and the
fertility goddess ESTSANATLEHI. According to tradition, he van-Nataraja

*(lord of the dance)*

quished a race of giants who had nearly destroyed Form of the god SˇIVA.
Hindu (Puranic). Emerging the human race. He is a benevolent god, ready
to from AD 1200 onward, this form depicts Sˇiva as help mankind in times
of trouble. He also cures

"lord of the dance" ringed by fire and with one foot diseases brought
about through witchcraft. Said on a demon in the form of a black dwarf.
Nataraja to live at the junction of two rivers in the arguably
epitomizes the moving power in the cos-San Juan valley, he is invoked by
warriors prepar-mos. Largely seen in southern Indian bronzes ing for
battle. His priest wears a buckskin bag which display the dance-form
*anandatandava.*

mask, painted black and adorned with five zigzag lightning streaks, the
eye and mouth holes covered with white sea shells. He also wears a
**Natha**

fox skin collar, a crimson cloth around the hips Tutelary god. Buddhist
\[Sri Lanka\]. One of and a leather belt with silver ornamentation, but
four local emanations of the BODHISATTVA is otherwise naked. No
depictions are made of AVALOKITESVARA.

this deity.

**Naunet**

**Ndaula**

Primordial goddess. Egyptian. One of the eight Plague god. Bunyoro
\[Uganda, East Africa\]. Par-deities of the OGDOAD representing chaos,
she is ticularly associated with smallpox. His shrines are coupled with
the god NUN and appears in anthro-usually situated on the edge of a
community and pomorphic form but with the head of a snake.

on the frontiers of the tribal land so that he may The pair epitomize
the primordial abyss. She is be invoked to keep the disease in
neighboring also depicted greeting the rising sun in the guise
territory.

of a baboon.

**Navadurga(s)**

**Ndjambi**

Generic title of a group of deities. Hindu. The Sky god. Herero
\[Namibia, southwest Africa\]. A nine forms of the god DURGA. The common
benevolent deity who protects and lifts up all who vehicle is a chariot
shaped like a lotus. Each car-die natural deaths. The utterance of his
name is ries a wide assortment of attributes.

generally forbidden.

**Navasakti(s)**

`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_005.html}

**Nebethetpet**

Generic title of a group of goddesses. Hindu.

Local primordial goddess. Egyptian. She was The nine MATARAS or mothers.
In southern India worshiped in Heliopolis and is a female counter-they
are considered virgin goddesses and are held part to the sun god ATUM in
creation mythology.

in higher esteem that the comparable group of Specifically she is the
hand with which he grasped SAPTAMATARAS.

his penis to self-create the cosmos.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p231}216 **Nebo**

**Nebo**

fertility---a basket of fruit or cornucopia. She God of writing and
wisdom. Western Semitic.

may also often have a small lapdog. Alternatively, Known from
Syrio-Palestinian inscriptions and she stands with one foot on the prow
of a boat equating to the Akkadian NABU. Mentioned in and grasps an oar
or the rope.

the *Vetus Testamentum*.

**Nehebu-Kau**

**Nediyon**

Minor snake god. Egyptian. Known from circa Creator god. Early Dravidian
(Tamil) \[southern 1500 BC. Essentially a chthonic deity he is, India\].
Equates with a syncretization of VISŇU

according to tradition, the son of the god GEB.

and KRSNA. The name implies a deity of tall Allegedly having eaten seven
cobras, Nehebu-stature. Sangam texts describe him wearing a Kau offers
protection against snake bite and scor-golden robe. Attributes: conch,
prayer wheel and pion sting. He is also one of the guardians of the
lotus. Also Neduvel.

Egyptian king in the afterlife.

**Nefertum**

**Neit**

Minor god of primordial creation. Egyptian God of war. Celtic (Irish). A
minor deity identi-

(Lower). Specifically he is the blue lotus blossom of fied as the
consort of the goddess MORRIGAN in RE. Nefertum was worshiped in the
Nile delta as her aspect as Nemain. Also the grandfather of the son of
the cobra goddess WADJET. At Memphis Balor, he was killed at the second
legendary Bathe is the son of the goddess SAKHMET, while else-tle of
Moytura.

where in Lower Egypt his mother is considered to be the goddess BASTET.
Also Nephthemis (Greek).

**NEITH**

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Creator goddess.

**Negun**

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC until Minor goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

the end of Egyptian history circa AD 400.

Known from limited references and of uncertain **SYNONYMS** none.

function. Possibly associated with the goddess **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Sais \[Sa el-Hagar\] in the SIRARA. Her brother is Asˇai and they are
linked Nile delta.

with the cities of Adab and Kesˇ. Also Lisin.

**ART REFERENCES** various sculptures, reliefs and wall paintings.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid Texts; a papyrus **Nehalennia**

from Dynasty XX; etc.

Goddess of seafarers. Romano-Celtic. Worshiped extensively between the
second and thirteenth Neith is a goddess of Lower Egypt specifically
centuries AD, particularly in the Netherlands associated with Sais but
soon becoming part of the with sanctuaries at Domberg at the mouth of
the national pantheon with a sanctuary at Memphis.

Rhine and Colijnsplaat on the Scheldt. Probably According to legend,
when Neith emerged from began as a tribal deity of the Morini tribe. She
the primeval ocean to create the world, she fol-is generally depicted
with the attributes of lowed the course of the Nile down toward the sea

[]{#index_split_005.html#p232}**Nephthys** 217

and, on reaching the delta, founded the city of Sais.

responsible for transporting the souls of the guilty She is also a birth
goddess both of the cosmos and to Tartarus. She is also described as the
deification of other deities when she is depicted as the great of
indignation. Her presence may be symbolized celestial cow. She is the
mother of Egyptian rulers.

by the fabulous winged griffon. Her cult was pre-Neith is depicted in
human form wearing the dominantly at Rhamnus (Attica), where a mag-red
crown of Lower Egypt and in ancient times nificent temple was built in
her honor in the fifth her pre-anthropomorphic symbol was a shield
century BC, and in Smyrna. She also had a temple bearing crossed arrows.
She was sometimes called at Iconium in Asia Minor. According to legend,
upon for advice and judgment, as in the case of ZEUS raped her and she
bore HELEN in conse-the eighty-year battle of the gods between SETH

quence. In certain respects she provides a paral-and HORUS, when she
advised the sun god RE in lel with the goddess ERINYS. Her cult became
one favor of Horus. In other legends she becomes the of morality.

consort of Seth and the mother of the crocodile god SOBEK.

**Nemetona**

Goddess of sacred groves. Romano-Celtic. Con-Nekhbet

sort to the Roman deity MARS. Evidenced at Local mother goddess.
Egyptian (Upper). Known places such as Bath (England) and Mainz
(Ger-from Nekhab (el-Kab), she is generally depicted many); but also in
place names which include the in the form of a vulture with one or both
wings etymological base *nemeton* (a shrine).

spread and holding the symbols of eternity in her talons. Nekhbet is
known from at least 3000 BC

and is mentioned in the Pyramid Texts as the **Ne'nenkicex**

"great white cow"---a familiar epithet in respect Creator god. Kamchadal
\[southeastern Siberia\].

of Egyptian mother or creator goddesses.

The name given to the Christian god by the Kamchadals under influence of
the Russian Orthodox church.

**Nekmet Awai**

Goddess of justice. Egyptian. Locally known from Hermopolis, she later
became syncretized **Neper**

with the goddess HATHOR.

God of grain crops. Egyptian. The son of the snake spirit RENENUTET, he
is subservient to HAPY, the god of the Nile flood, and has links
**Nemausius**

with OSIRIS as a vegetation deity who dies and is God of water.
Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Associ-reborn to the afterlife. In female form
the deity ated locally with a sacred spring at Nimes in becomes Nepit.

France.

**Nephthys**

*\[Greek\]*

**Nemesis**

Funerary goddess. Egyptian. Nephthys is the Goddess of justice and
revenge. Greco-Roman.

younger sister of ISIS, OSIRIS and SETH, who are The dreaded deity who,
with the Furies, is the offspring of the chthonic god GEB and the

[]{#index_split_005.html#p233}218 **Neptunus** sky goddess NUT in the
*Ennead* genealogy of **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC to
Egyptian deities defined by the priests of circa 200 BC.

Heliopolis. Nephthys is depicted in human form **SYNONYMS** Erakal,
Lugalgirra, Meslamtaea.

wearing a crown in the style of the hieroglyphic **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Kuthu and Tarbisu.

for a mansion, the translation of her Egyptian **ART REFERENCES**
plaques, votive stelae and name. She can also take the form of a hawk
glyptics.

watching over the funeral bier of Osiris. Accord-LITERARY SOURCES
cuneiform texts particularly ing to legend Nephthys liaised briefly with
Osiris *Nergal and Eresˇkigal.*

and bore the mortuary god ANUBIS. She is said to guide the dead Egyptian
ruler through the dark The son of ENLIL and NINLIL and the consort of
underworld and to weep for him. Also Neb-hut the underworld goddess
ERESˇKIGAL. He is (Egyptian).

depicted as a god of war and sudden death as well as being ruler of the
underworld. He may be also seen as a plague god. His sanctuary is known
as **Neptunus**

the *Emesľam.* He is usually depicted as a bearded God of irrigation.
Italic and Roman. Identified figure emerging from the ground and
carrying with the planet Neptune, but thought to have a double-edged
mace-scimitar typically embel-originated as an agricultural deity
concerned with lished with lion heads. By the Hellenic period he
watering. He was celebrated in the festival of *Nepis identified with
the god HERAKLES.*

*tunalia* on July 23. Also the patron deity of horse-racing. He became
syncretized with the Greek god POSEIDON, but Neptune's modern
associa-Nerrivik

tion with the sea is a misrepresentation.

Sea goddess. Inuit. The mother of all sea creatures, invoked by
fishermen and seal hunters.

*See also* SEDNA.

**Nereides**

Animistic spirits of the sea. Greco-Roman.

Female personalities, the best known of whom is **NERTHUS**

*(north)*

AMPHITRITE, assigned the guardianship of the **ORIGIN**

probably Danish \[Sjaeland, Denmark\].

oceans by the great gods and invoked by seafarers.

Fertility goddess associated with peace.

Also attendants of the god POSEIDON.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 100, though probably much earlier,
until AD 400 or later (difficult to determine).

**Nereus**

**SYNONYMS** none known.

Minor sea god. Greek. The son of PONTOS and **CENTER(S) OF WORSHIP** a
sacred grove "in an GAIA, and the father of the NEREIDES.

island of the ocean" identified only by the *See also* PROTEUS.

writer Tacitus.

**ART REFERENCES** none.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Germania* 40 (Tacitus).

**NERGAL**

**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylon-Some authors argue that
Nerthus is a female ian-Akkadian) \[Iraq\]. Chthonic underworld god.

counterpart, possibly the sister, of the Viking god

[]{#index_split_005.html#p234}**Nike** 219

NJORD. Tacitus alludes to her as TERRA MATER

of deities belonging to the MICTLANTECUHTLI and describes how her cult
statue was carried complex.

around in a covered sacred wagon drawn by oxen (see also FREYR).

The vehicle was taboo to all but the priest of **Ngai**

the goddess and, after each tour, was returned to Creator god. Kikuyu
and Masai \[East Africa\]. The the grove where it was washed and stored.

name given to a single god in the heavens, influ-All ministering
attendants were immediately enced by the spread of Christianity. He is
also per-slaughtered. A pair of elaborate ceremonial wag-ceived as, and
may have evolved from, a weather ons, dated to about AD 200, were
excavated from god whose presence is symbolized by lightning.

a peat bog at Dejbjerg (Denmark) and are thought to be of a type that
carried such a deity.

**Ngunuwo**

Generic title of guardian deities. Ewe \[Togo, **Nesu**

West Africa\]. The name means, approximately, Tutelary god of royalty.
Fon \[Benin, West Africa\].

the fates.

The guardian of the tribal chiefs, his shrine, the Nese-we, is located
close by royal palaces.

**Ni**

Sea god. Chimu Indian (pre-Columbian South **Nethuns**

America) \[coastal areas of Peru\]. A significant God of fresh water.
Etruscan. Identified with deity in the pantheon, revered by fishermen.

wells and springs and depicted as a naked bearded Often linked with SI,
the moon god.

figure. He is probably to be equated with the Roman god NEPTUNUS.

**Niamye**

Creator god. Baule \[Ivory Coast, West Africa\].

**Neti**

He engendered a consort for himself and Chthonic underworld god.
Mesopotamian proceeded to create all other living things on (Sumerian
and Babylonian-Akkadian). Chief earth. His anger is evidenced by
lightning and gatekeeper of the netherworld. The servant of
thunderbolts.

the goddess ERESˇKIGAL. Neti features prominently in the epic legend of
*Inana'* s *Descent into* *the Underworld* when he opens the seven gates
**Niha-Tsu-Hi-No-Kami**

of the realm and admits the goddess, removing Fire god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Specifically the fire *KAMI* one emblem of her power at the
threshold of responsible for household fires in the yard.

each gate.

**Nike**

**Nextepehua**

*(ash-scatterer)*

Goddess of victory. Greco-Roman. Depicted as a Minor chthonic underworld
god. Aztec (classi-winged messenger bringing the laurel wreath to cal
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group the victor of battle. Though
of Greek origin,

[]{#index_split_005.html#p235}220 **Nikkal**

appearing in the *Theogon* y of Hesiod, she was **Nin Me En**

adopted by the Romans and worshiped Goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian).
Probably extensively throughout Asia Minor, including equating to
NINMENA.

Sardis. In some depictions the goddess ATHENA carries NIKE as a small
winged figure. Also VICTORIA (Roman).

**Nin Ur**

God. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). Probably synonymous with NINURTA.

**Nikkal**

Moon goddess. Western Semitic (Syrian). The consort of the moon god
Jarih and probably **Ninazu**

evolved from the Mesopotamian pantheon.

Chthonic god. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). Less frequently encountered in
the texts than NERGAL. Son of ENLIL and NINLIL or, in alternative
**Niladanda**

traditions, of ERESˇKIGAL and the father of God. Buddhist. A *dikpala*
or guardian deity of the Ning-is-zida. The patron deity of Esňunna until
southwestern quarter. Color: blue. Attributes: superseded by TISPAK. His
sanctuaries are jewel, lotus, staff, sword and trident.

the E-sikil and E-kurma. Also identified as a god of healing, he is
(unlike Nergal) generally benevolent.

**Niladevi**

*(black goddess)*

Consort of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Puranic).

Mentioned only in the *Vaikhanasagama* text as the **Nindara**

third wife of Visňu, no art representation of this God. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian). The consort of goddess has been discovered. She may be
identi-the goddess NANSĚ.

cal with the goddess Pinnai known in Tamil-speaking regions.

**Nindub**

God. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). Locally known **Nilalohita**

and identified with the city state of Lagasˇ.

God. Hindu. One of the EKADASARUDRAS or eleven forms of the god RUDRA.

**Ninegal**

*(strong-armed lord)*

God of smiths. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Nin Ezen (La)

Akkadian). A minor patron deity.

Goddess. Sumerian. An alternative name for the goddess of healing, GULA.

**Ningal**

*(great queen)*

Reed goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and **Nin Mar Ki**

Babylonian-Akkadian). Ningal is the daughter Goddess. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian). See of ENKI and NINGIKUGA and the consort of NINMAH.

the moon god NANNA by whom she bore UTU

[]{#index_split_005.html#p236}**NINHURSAG**

**˜ A** 221

the sun god. She was probably first worshiped **NINHURSAG**

**˜ A** *(queen of the mountain)* by cow-herders in the marsh lands of
**ORIGIN** Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylon-southern Mesopotamia.
Chiefly recognized ian-Akkadian) \[Iraq\]. Mother goddess.

at Ur.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC until circa 1750 BC.

**SYNONYMS** NINMAH (great queen); NINTU (lady **Ningikuga**

*(lady of the pure reed)*

of birth); Mama or MAMI (mother); ARURU

Goddess of reeds and marshes. Mesopotamian (sister of ENLIL); BELET-ILI
(lady of the gods---

(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). One of the Akkadian). Minor
**SYNONYMS** include Nin-consorts of ENKI and the daughter of AN and
ziznak (lady of the embryo); Nin-dim (lady NAMMU.

fashioner); Nagar-sagak (carpenter of insides); Nin-bahar (lady potter);
Nin-mag (lady vulva); Nin-sig-sig (lady of silence); Mud-kesda
**Ningilin**

(blood-stauncher); Ama-dug-bad (mother Obscure deity. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and spreading the knees); Ama-ududa (mother who
Babylonian-Akkadian). His symbol is probably has given birth);
Sag-zu-dingirenak (midwife the mongoose. Also Ninkilim.

of the gods); Ninmenna (lady of the diadem).

**CENTER(S) OF WORSHIP** Tell el 'Ubaid \[Ur\]. Mari.

Other temples, according to literature, were **Ningirama**

located at Kesˇ, Adab (modern Bismaya) and God of magic. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Hiza, none of which have been found. Smaller
Babylonian-Akkadian). A minor deity invoked temples and shrines
scattered around southern particularly as a protection against snakes.

Mesopotamia and beyond.

**ART REFERENCES** plaques, votive stelae, glyptics.

**LITERARY SOURCES** cuneiform texts---epics includ-Ningirsu

ing *Enki and World Order* and *Creator of the Hoe,* Tutelary god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and temple hymns, etc.

Babylonian-Akkadian). His mother is NINHURSAG

˜ A. Known from the city of Lagas (Girsu) Ninhursag˜a is one of seven
great deities of Sumer.

where Gudea built a major temple in his honor, Assuming her symbol to be
the §omega, it has the *Eninnu.* His symbol is a lion-headed eagle and
been depicted in art from circa 3000 BC, though his weapon the mace
Sˇarur. Texts describe more generally from early second millennium. It
Ningirsu making a journey to Eridu to notify the appears on some
*kudurru* boundary stones---on god ENKI of Gudea's achievement.

the upper tier, which indicates her importance.

She is principally a fertility goddess though technically any female
deity could take on the role.

**Ningiszida**

Temple hymn sources identify her as the "true and The god of light
coming from the horizon.

great lady of heaven" and kings of Sumer were Mesopotamian (Sumerian and
Babylonian-

"nourished by Ninhursag˜a's milk." Distinct from Akkadian). Tutelary god
of Gudea of Lagasˇ, the the goddess INANA, she enjoys closer links with
son of NINAZU. Identified in Akkadian texts and fecundity and birth and
is sometimes portrayed as on a seal of Gudea. Also GISZIDA.

a midwife, or with bosom bare and carrying a

[]{#index_split_005.html#p237}222 **Ninigi**

baby on her left arm. She is typically depicted **Nin'insinna**

wearing horned headdress and tiered skirt; often Fertility goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and with bow cases at her shoulders; not
infrequently Babylonian-Akkadian). A daughter of An and carrying a mace
or baton surmounted by the Urasˇand probably an alternative name for
Isťar.

*omega* motif or a derivation; sometimes accompa-She is the consort of
the god Pabilsag and is men-nied by a lion cub on a leash. The tutelary
deity tioned in respect of a sanctuary built by Warad to several
Sumerian rulers, in *Creator of the Hoe* Sin during the Isin dynasty.
Texts describe her she completed the birth of mankind after the going to
present Enlil with gifts in Nippur. Other heads had been uncovered by
ENKI's hoe.

inscriptions suggest she was the mother of the Most Mesopotamian gods
lived in mountains and god Damu (Dumuzi).

the name Ninhursag˜a bears significance because, according to legend, it
was changed from NINMAH

by her son NINURTA to commemorate his creation **Ninkarnunna**

of the mountains. Her name "lady of silence"

Barber god. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and derives from the notion that the
child in the womb Babylonian-Akkadian). An attendant of the god is
susceptible to both good and bad influence. Thus Ninurta.

the wrong incantations may jeopardize the child's well-being. As "lady
of the diadem," according to a Babylonian investiture ritual, she placed
the **Ninkigal**

golden crown on the king in the *Eanna* temple.

Chthonic god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). Worshiped at Ur and
Umma during the period of the third dynasty of Ur.

**Ninigi (Prince)**

Celebrations included the *eses* monthly lunar Ancestral god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The deity who, festivals.

according to tradition, is the heir apparent of the sun goddess
Amaterasu. He was sent to earth from heaven to rule at the behest of the
gods. His **Ninkurra**

parents are Taka-Mi-Musubi and Ame-No-Oshi-Minor mother goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumer-Ho-Mimi and he takes the title of "divine grand-ian
and Babylonian-Akkadian). Ninkurra is linked child." He is the ancestral
deity of the imperial briefly as consort to Enlil (her grandfather), by
dynasties.

whom after nine days of gestation she gave birth to the goddess Uttu. In
alternative mythology she was the mother of Nin-imma, the deification of
**Nin-Ildu**

female sex organs.

God of carpenters. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). Minor tutelary
deity.

**Ninlil**

Goddess of the air and of grain. Mesopotamian **Nin-Imma**

(Sumerian). She is the daughter of the god of Fertility goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and stores, Haia, and the barley goddess,
Ninsebar-Babylonian-Akkadian). Deification of the female gunnu. The
consort of the air god Enlil, who sex organs, fathered by Enki with
Ninkurra.

impregnated her with water to create the moon

[]{#index_split_005.html#p238}**Nintu** 223

god Nana, she also conceived the underworld god **Ninsikil**

Nergal when Enlil impregnated her disguised as The goddess of Dilmun.
Mesopotamian (Sumer-the gateman of Nippur. In a similar manner she ian).
The patron deity of the mythical paradise conceived the underworld god
Ninazu when Enlil land of Dilmun which seems to have been
per-impregnated her disguised as the "man of the ceived as somewhere off
the coast of the Persian river of the nether world, the man-devouring
Gulf but firmly beyond the frontiers of Sumer. It river." According to
some texts she is also the is Ninsikil who pleads with Enki to provide
the mother of Ninurta, the god of the plough and earth with the boon of
fresh water in the sacred thunderstorms.

rivers Tigris and Euphrates.

**Ninmah**

**Ninsˇubur**

Mother goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian Messenger god(dess). Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Probably an early and
Babylonian-Akkadian). The servant of the syncretization with
Ninhursag˜a. Identified in goddess Inana, she is particularly prominent
in creation texts acting as midwife while the the legend of *Inana's
Descent and the Death of* mother goddess Nammu makes different *Dumuzi*.
In Akkadian texts the sex changes to a kinds of human individuals from
lumps of clay male personality, the minister of Anu.

at a feast given by Enki to celebrate the creation of humankind. Also
regarded as the mother of the goddess Uttu by Enki.

**Ninsun(a)**

*(lady wild cow)*

*See also* Ninhursag˜a.

Cow goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Tutelary
goddess of Gudea of Lagasˇ. Consort of the Sumerian heroic **Ninmena** (
*lady of the crown*) king Lugalbanda and also identified as the mother
Mother goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

of the hero Gilgamesˇ.

Probably became syncretized with Ninhursag˜a.

**Ninsˇusˇinak**

**Ninni**

National god. Elamite \[Iran\]. Derived from a Goddess. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian). A modern Sumerian model.

mis-reading of Innin, which is itself an outmoded version of the name
Inana.

**Nintinugga**

Goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). See Gula.

**Nin-sˇar**

*(lady plant)*

Minor mother goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). Nin-sˇar is linked
briefly as consort to either **Nintu**

Enlil (her father) or Enki by whom, after nine Mother goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and days of gestation, she gave birth to the
goddess Babylonian-Akkadian). According to legend she Ninkurra who, in
turn, became the mother of the pinched off fourteen pieces of primordial
clay goddess Uttu.

which she formed into womb deities, seven on

[]{#index_split_005.html#p239}224 **NINURTA** the left and seven on the
right with a brick and being the chief adversary, in the hands of
between them, who produced the first seven pairs Ninurta, of Kur. He
carries the double-edged of human embryos. She is closely identified
with scimitar-mace embellished with lions' heads and, the goddess
Ninhursag˜a and may have become according to some authors, is depicted
in non-Belet Ili (mistress of the gods) when, at Enki's human form as
the thunderbird lmdugud (sling suggestion, the gods slew one among
themselves stone), which bears the head of a lion and may and used his
blood and flesh, mixed with clay, to represent the hailstones of the
god. His sanctuary create mankind.

is the *E-padun-tila.*

Ninurta is perceived as a youthful warrior and probably equates with the
Babylonian heroic god **NINURTA**

*(lord plough)*

Marduk. His cult involved a journey to Eridu *Orgin* Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and Babylon-from both Nippur and Girsu. He may be
com-ian-Akkadian) \[Iraq\]. God of thunderstorms pared with Isˇkur, who
was worshiped primarily by and the plough.

herdsmen as a storm god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC to 200 BC.

**SYNONYMS** probably Ningirsu.

**Nirmali**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Nippur and, as Ningirsu, at Birth goddess. Kafir
\[Afghanistan\]. Goddess of Girsu.

the childbirth but usually separated from the rest **ART REFERENCES**
plaques, votive stelae, glyptics, of the village. She is invoked by
women during etc.

labor or menstruation. Her sacred animal is the **LITERARY SOURCES**
creation epics including *Atra-ram. There is an argument that she is, in
fact, a *hasis* and *Anzu*; temple hymns, etc.*

manifestation of the goddess Disani rather than a distinct deity. Also
Shuwe.

Ninurta is the Sumerian god of farmers and is identified with the
plough. He is also the god of thunder and the hero of the Sumerian
pantheon, **Nirrti**

*(destruction)*

closely linked with the confrontation battles 1. Destructive goddess of
darkness. Hindu (Vedic between forces of good and evil that characterize
and Puranic). Known chiefly from the *Rg-veda,* much of Mesopotamian
literature. He is one of Nirrti has a generally malignant aspect and is
several challengers of the malignant dragon or associated with pain,
misfortune and death. She is serpent Kur said to inhabit the empty space
believed to live in the south (the land of the dead).

between the earth's crust and the primeval sea She is dark-skinned,
wears dark dress and receives beneath. Ninurta is the son of Enlil and
Ninhur-the "dark husks" of sacrifice. She is feared by sag˜a,
alternatively Ninlil, and is the consort of many Hindus, whose offerings
are frequent and Gula, goddess of healing. He is attributed with
repeated. In later Hinduism, Nirrti changes sex the creation of the
mountains which he is said to and becomes a *dikpala* god of terrifying
appear-have built from giant stones with which he had ance, guarding the
southwestern quarter; he has fought against the demon Asag.

various consorts including Davi, Kalika and He wears the horned helmet
and tiered skirt Krsnangi. He stands upon a lion, a man or a and carries
a weapon Sˇarur which becomes per-corpse. Attributes: javelin, shield,
staff, sword and sonified in the texts, having its own intelligence
teeth.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p240}**Nona** 225

2\. God. Buddhist. A *dikpala* or guardian. Color: over as a hostage and
becomes the pledge of blue. Stands upon a corpse. Attributes: shield
truce between the two races. He is a god of and sword.

seafarers and fishermen, and brings the wealth of the sea to mankind. He
also controls the winds and storms. Consort of SKADI, the
daugh-Niruktipratisamvit

ter of the giant Thiassi, he is the father of FREYR

Goddess of etymological analysis. Buddhist and FREYJA. According to one
poem, he lives (Vajrayana). One of a group of four. Color: red.

among an enclosure of ships, Noatun. The Attributes: chain and lotus.

use of ships as burial chambers was probably closely associated with
Njord, and further links between ships and fertility seem well
estab-Nissaba

lished, strengthening the connection with this Goddess of writing and
wisdom. Mesopotamian Vanir deity.

(Sumerian). A daughter of AN and probably originally a vegetation deity.
Her symbol is the inscribing stylus. She is a patron deity of Unug
**Nodotus**

\[Warka\].

Minor god of cereal crops. Romano-Celtic.

Specifically the deity responsible for the well-being of grain stalks.

**Nispannatara**

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana).

**Nomi-No-Sukune**

God of Sumo wrestlers. Shinto \[Japan\]. Accord-NJORD

*(north)*

ing to tradition in the *Nihongi* text he came **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic). God of the sea and to prominence during the reign of the
winds.

emperor Suinin-Tenno when he matched and **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
Viking period circa worsted a strong man, Kuyahaya, in a wrestling AD
700 and earlier, until Christianization (circa contest. He killed the
latter by aiming a kick AD 1100).

at his ribs.

**SYNONYMS** possibly NERTHUS, though with change of sex from female to
male.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none known, but many place **Nommo**

names along the Norwegian coast and inland by Generic title of a group
of gods. Dogon \[West lakes and fjords suggest a widespread devotion.

Africa\]. The primordial spirits at the head of **ART REFERENCES** none
known, but probably the whom is the creator god AMMA. They are
associ-subject of anonymous carvings.

ated with rain and fertility and have imparted cer-LITERARY SOURCES
Icelandic codices; *Prose* tain skills to mankind.

*Edda* (Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); runic inscriptions.

**Nona**

Njord originates as a VANIR deity, but during Minor goddess of birth.
Roman. Responsible for the war between Vanir and AESIR he is handed the
ninth month of gestation, she is often linked

[]{#index_split_005.html#p241}226 **Nong**

with the goddess DECIMA. In later Roman times **Nrtya**

*(dance)*

she becomes one of a trio of goddesses of fate, Mother goddess.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One with Decima and MORTA, the goddess of
death, of the ASTAMATARAS *.* Color: green or various.

collectively known as the *PARCAE*.

Attribute: staff.

**Nong**

**Nsongo**

God of winter and cold weather. Kafir Moon goddess. Bangala \[Democratic
Republic of

\[Afghanistan\]. Nong lives in a glacier. He cracks Congo, central
Africa\]. The sister and consort of the ice and is seen in the melt
water. He is per-the supreme sun god LIBANZA. In the epic legend ceived
as a misogynist and depicted in a wooden of *Nsongo and Lianja* she is
the twin sister and effigy, though whether in human form is consort of a
deified folk-hero.

unclear. His cult center seems to have been the village of Zumu in the
southern Hindukush.

Also Zuzum.

**Nu Kua**

Creator goddess. Chinese. A primordial deity who may be androgynous and
who engendered **Nortia**

mankind out of lumps of yellow clay. The inven-Goddess of fate.
Etruscan. She enjoyed an impor-tion of the flute is also attributed to
her. Also Nu-tant sanctuary at Volsini, where her presence was Gua.

symbolized by a large nail. In a New Year rite, the nail was hammered
into a block of wood, probably derived from an old fertility ritual
symboliz-Nu Mus Da

ing the impregnation of life into the new year. She Tutelary god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian). The has been identified with the Greek goddess
patron deity of the lost city of Kazallu, mentioned TYCHE.

in texts.

**Nosenga**

**NUADU**

*(wealth)*

Tribal god. Korekore (Shona) \[Zimbabwe, south-ORIGIN Celtic (Irish).
Tribal war god associated ern Africa\]. He is accessible to mankind
through with healing.

a mortal medium or oracle known as Hore, who **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
prehistoric times lives in the town of the tribal chief and is con-until
Christianization circa AD 400.

sulted only with the chief's permission. Nosenga **SYNONYMS** Nuada
argatlam; Nodens (Romano-has several human priestess consorts who are
Celtic); Nudd (Welsh).

wedded to him in chastity in the fashion of **CENTER(S) OF CULT** the
best known is the sanc-Christian nuns.

tuary of Nodens at Lydney, Gloucestershire, England.

**ART REFERENCES** none specific, though possibly **Notus**

the subject of anonymous carvings.

God of the southwest winds. Roman. Derived **LITERARY SOURCES** *Books
of Invasions; Cycles of* from a Greek model. Also Auster.

*Kings;* votive inscriptions.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p242}**NUT** 227

One of the TUATHA DE DANANN who lost an Nunbarsegunu allegedly instructs
her daughter in arm at the Battle of Moytura against the Fir Bolg.

the arts of obtaining the attentions of ENLIL.

The arm was replaced by the physician god DIANCECHT who made a
prosthesis out of silver, hence Nuada *argatlam* (Nuadu of the silver
hand).

**Nurelli**

*(Nooralie)*

The original sanctuary at Lydney in Gloucester-Creator god. Australian
aboriginal. Chiefly shire was taken over and enlarged by the Romans
revered among the Wiimbaio aborigines living in who renamed the god
Nodens. Also considered to the area of the Murray River, he is believed
to be the father of the Irish royal dynasty.

have created the land of Australia and then brought law and order to
humankind. His son is Gnawdenoorte.

**Nudimmud**

Creator god. Mesopotamian (Sumerian). Rapidly syncretized with the
Akkadian god EA.

**Nusˇku**

God of light. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). The son
of ENLIL. Also a **Nuli'rahak**

*(big woman)*

god of fire, he is symbolized by a lamp. Sanctuar-Sea spirit. Siberian
Inuit. A fearsome old woman ies have been identified at Harran and
Neirab.

who lives in the ocean depths and owns all the sea creatures. She feeds
off the bodies of drowned fishermen.

**NUT**

*See also* ARNA'KUAGSAK.

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Creator goddess.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC and probably earlier, until
the end of Egyptian his-Nun

tory circa AD 400.

Primordial god. Egyptian. One of the eight **SYNONYMS** none.

deities of the OGDOAD representing chaos, he is **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Heliopolis, Karnak and coupled with the goddess NAUNET and appears in
many other sanctuaries throughout Egypt.

anthropomorphic form but with the head of a **ART REFERENCES** wall
paintings in the royal frog. No cult is addressed to Nun but he is
typi-tombs at Thebes; sarcophagi, etc.

cally depicted holding aloft the solar barque or **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts, etc.

the sun disc. He may appear greeting the rising sun in the guise of a
baboon. Nun is otherwise Nut is the most important female principle of
the symbolized by the presence of a sacred cistern or creation force in
Egyptian cosmogony. According lake as in the sanctuaries of Karnak and
Dendara.

to the *Ennead* genealogy of the Heliopolis priests, she is the daughter
of the god SˇU and the goddess TEFNUT. Generally, however, she is seen
as the **Nunbarsegunu**

creator goddess who, with the sun god, gives birth Obscure mother
goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumer-to the other deities of the pantheon. In
legend she ian and Babylonian-Akkadian). Mentioned in cre-becomes the
consort of her brother, the chthonic ation texts as the "old woman of
Nippur," she is god GEB. Their partnership generates ISIS, identified as
the mother of NINLIL, the air goddess.

OSIRIS, SETH and NEPHTHYS. In her earliest

[]{#index_split_005.html#p243}228 **Nu'tenut** appearances Nut is a
celestial cow stretching male aspect by the sun, and his female aspect
by across the sky, often held aloft by the figure of the the moon. He
gave mankind its soul and is the air god Sˇu. This depiction continues
into later controller of destiny. He enjoys a dedicated times. In human
form she often appears as a slim, priesthood and is worshiped in the
form of a tree arched figure, nude and balanced on her toes and trunk.
Also Odomankoma; Onyame; Onyanko-fingertips, which touch the four
cardinal points of pon; Totrobonsu.

the compass. In this posture she forms an arch over Geb, whose erect
penis points upwards toward her. She is alternatively often supported
**gNyan**

and separated from Geb by Sˇu.

Tree spirits, Tibetan. Malevolent forces residing Nut is perceived as
the barrier of the firma-in the mountains which can bring sickness or
ment which separates the ordered cosmos from death.

primordial matter. The thunder is her laughter.

The solar barque travels along the arch of her body, entering her mouth
as night falls to pass **Nyavirezi**

through her and emerge at dawn from her Lion goddess. Rwanda \[central
Africa\]. According vulva.

to legend she was originally a mortal daughter of In a funerary context,
when the ruler dies he is the tribal chief. While walking, she was
trans-said to be enfolded by the arms of Nut and to pass formed into a
lioness. Though returning to within her body: "the doors of the sky are
opened human form, she occasionally became leonine to him."

again and, in this guise, slew at least one husband who discovered her
secret.

**Nu'tenut**

Earth spirit. Chukchee \[eastern Siberia\]. The **Nyx**

owner of the world who sits in a large house built Primordial goddess.
Greek. The essence of the of iron. He is surrounded by the spirits of
sun, night whose sons were the twin brothers HYPNOS, moon, sky, sea,
dawn, darkness and world who god of sleep, and THANATOS, god of death.

are suitors for his daughter (unnamed).

**Nzambi**

**Nyakaya**

Creator god. Bakongo \[Democratic Republic of Crocodile goddess. Shilluk
\[Sudan\]. A deity resid-Congo, central Africa\]. He created the first
moring in the Nile, she is the consort of Okwa and the tal pair or, in
alternative tradition, an androgy-mother of the first Shilluk king.
Shilluks continue nous being in the guise of a palm tree called to
sacrifice to Nyakaya.

*Muntu Walunga* (the complete person). He also endowed this being with
intelligence. In wooden sculptures the tree bears a woman's head and
**Nyame**

breast on one side and a bearded face on the Creator god. Akan
\[southern Ghana, West other. Eventually the tree divided into two
sepa-Africa\]. An androgynous being symbolized in his rate sexes. Also
Nyambi; Nzambe; Yambe; Zambi.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p244}**Nze** 229

**Nzapa**

**Nze**

Creator god. Ngbandi \[Democratic Republic of Moon god. Ngbandi
\[Democratic Republic of Congo, central Africa\]. One of seven deities
Congo, central Africa\]. One of the seven children invoked at sunrise
each morning. The progeni-of KETUA, the god of fortune and LOMO, the
god-tor of all life on earth, he also gave mankind dess of peace. He is
closely linked with women laws and controls destiny or fate. He has four
and fertility. At menstruation he is said to have children who
specifically appear in the guise of

"cut the girl" and, during pregnancy, "the moon palm trees.

is dark for her."

[]{#index_split_005.html#p245}O

6

**Obarator**

the five world ages, each of which lasted for 2,028

God of agriculture. Roman. Specifically respon-heavenly years, each
heavenly year being fifty-sible for overseeing the top-dressing of
crops.

two terrestrial years. Assigned to the earth and presided over by
TEZCATLIPOCA. According to tradition, the age was populated by a race of
**Obatala**

giants and it ended in a catalclysmic destruction Fertility god. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\]. The caused by huge and ferocious jaguars which
first deity engendered by the creator god OLODU-devoured them.
Illustrated by the *Stone of the Four* MARE. His consort is Yemowo.
Among other *Suns* \[Yale Peabody Museum\]. Also
Oceloto-responsibilities, he makes barren women fertile natiuh;
Yoaltonatiuh; Tlalchitonatiuh.

and shapes the fetus in the womb. He is considered to be the sculptor of
mankind. He is depicted wearing white robes and symbolizes cleanliness.
Offer-Ocelus

ings include coconuts and maize fruits. A jar of God of healing.
Romano-Celtic (British). He clean water is carried by a priestess to his
sanctu-becomes largely syncretized with the Roman god ary each morning
and the water is drunk by women MARS, thus there is an inscription to
Mars Ocelus to make them fertile. Also Orishanla (archaic); at Carlisle.

Orisha-Popo; Orisha-Ogiyan; Orisha-Ijaye.

**Odin**

See OTHIN.

**Occator**

God of agriculture. Roman. Specifically responsible for overseeing
growth and harvesting of **Oduduwa**

crops.

Creator goddess. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West Africa\].

The consort, or alternatively the daughter, of the supreme god
OLODUMARE. She is perceived **Ocelotl**

as the substance, or matrix, of the earth which Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) Olodumare impregnated to generate life. She is

\[Mexico\]. The sun deity representing the first of also a goddess of
war and her sons include the 230

[]{#index_split_005.html#p246}**Okeanides** 231

great heroic Yoruba god O

**Ogiuwu**

GUN. According to

some traditions Oduduwa is also perceived as God of death. Edo \[Benin,
West Africa\]. Believed a god.

to own the blood of all living things which he smears on the walls of
his palace in the otherworld. Until recent times human sacrifice was
made regularly to this deity in the capital of the **Ogdoad**

Edo region, Benin City.

Primordial forces. Egyptian. The elements of chaos, eight in number,
which existed before the creation of the sun god and which are **Ogun**

known from Khemnu in Middle Egypt (Greek God of war, hunting and
metalwork. Edo \[Benin, Heliopolis). The Ogdoad also had a sanctuary
West Africa\]. This rather loosely defined deity at Medinet Habu. They
created, out of them-was sent by the god OSANOBUA to cut open the selves
rather than by sexual coupling, the land to allow crops to be planted.
He is the mound which emerged from the primeval strength inherent in
metals and piles of metal waters and upon which rested the egg from
objects are left beside his sanctuaries. As a god of which the young sun
god emerged. They are war he defends the tribe and is depicted wearing
usually depicted as baboons heralding the sun as armor and with red
eyes. As a god of hunters and it rises. They are grouped in pairs and
include farmers he is generally benevolent.

NUN and NAUNET representing the primordial abyss, KEK and KAUKET
representing darkness, H

**Ohoroxtotil**

*(god almighty)*

EH and HAUHET representing infinity, and A

Creator god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican) MUN and AMAUNET representing
hidden power.

\[Mexico\]. The creator of the sun and the deity who made the world
inhabitable for mankind by destroying the jaguars which once infested
it.

**Ogma**

See OGMIUS.

**Oi**

Sickness god. Suk \[western Kenya, East Africa\]. A **Ogmios**

See OGMIUS.

spirit of personal illness rather than plague. The sick person's house
is emptied and the priest exor-cizes Oi out of the dwelling.

**Ogmius**

God of poetry and speech. Celtic (Irish). Very little is known of him,
but the Roman writer **O-lwa-Dai-Myojin**

Lucian mentions a Romano-Celtic god of God of stoneworkers. Shinto and
Buddhist wisdom, Ogmios, apparently assimilated with

\[Japan\]. Probably more a Buddhist deity, but also HERCULES and
described as an old man with revered in Shintoism.

lion's skin holding a crowd of people chained to his tongue by their
ears.

**NOTE:** a goddess Ogma is also mentioned; she **Okeanides**

may have been a mother goddess in the original Sea deities. Greco-Roman.
Minor goddesses Irish pantheon.

assigned the guardianship of oceans by the great

[]{#index_split_005.html#p247}232 **Okeanos** gods and invoked by
seafarers. In alternative over the world. He has many consorts and
innu-tradition, they are river gods, the sons of merable offspring.

OKEANOS.

**Ola Bibi**

**Okeanos**

Local plague goddess. Hindu. Worshiped in Ben-God of the oceans. Greek.
A deity who remained gal where she is associated with cholera.

at his post when most of the other gods were summoned to Olympus by
ZEUS. His consort is TETHYS and he fathered children who included the
OKEANIDES, mainly river gods, and a large **Olodumare**

number of daughters headed by STYX, and includ-Creator god. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\]. He ing DORIS, METIS, and TYCHE.

engendered the god OBATALA as his deputy. The souls of the dead are
expected to make confession to Olodumare. When he created the earth, he
**Oki-Tsu-Hiko-No-Kami**

filled a snail's shell with dirt, placed inside it a God of kitchens.
Shinto \[Japan\]. One of the off-hen and a pigeon and threw it down,
whereupon spring of O-Toshi-No-Kami, the god of harvests.

the hen and pigeon began to scatter the earth and The consort of
Oki-Tsu-Hime-No-Kami and create land. Olodumare then sent a chameleon
responsible for the caldron in which water is to report on progress.
Sand was added, followed boiled.

by a palm, a coconut and a kola nut tree. When these were established
the god placed on earth the first sixteen humans**.** Also Alaaye;
Elemii; Olojo **Oko**

*(hoe)*

Oni; Olorun; Orishanla.

God of agriculture. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West Africa\]. According to
tradition he descended from heaven and lived at a farm near the town
**Olokun**

of Irao, where he attained a great age. One God of fresh waters and
oceans. Fon and Yoruba day he disappeared, leaving only his staff

\[Benin and Nigeria, West Africa\]. The eldest son which was taken as a
symbol of his presence.

of the creator god OSANOBUA. He is symbolized Annually, at the start of
the rainy season, a in the sacred river Olokun, which runs almost the
festival with strong fertility emphasis is held length of Benin and from
the source of which in his honor.

come the souls of unborn children. A girl baby is given a shrine of the
god which includes a pot of river water and which she takes with her to
her **O-Kuni-Nushi-No-Mikoto**

new home when she marries. The god is particu-Creator god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The great organ-larly popular among women and has a cult of
izer and consolidator of the earth in the priestesses. Olokun is also a
guardian deity of creation mythology of Shintoism. He took up mariners.

his duties after IZANAGI and IZANAMI had created the land. Tradition has
it that he first underwent a series of ordeals and then reigned
**Olorun**

See OLODUMARE.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p248}**Onuris** 233

**Omacatl**

He is depicted in human form and is often accom-Minor god of feasting
and revelry. Aztec (classical panied by the further depiction of a
couple Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group engaged in sexual
intercourse.

classed as the TEZCATLIPOCA complex. Also The household hearth is sacred
to Ometecuhtli (2)Acatl.

and he is closely linked with the fire god XIUHTECUHTLI. For alternative
creation mythology see TEZCATLIPOCA.

**Ome Tochtli**

Fertility god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. Slaughtered and then revived by TEZ-Ometeotl ( *two god*)
CATLIPOCA. Head of the group classed as the Ome-Primordial being. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) tochtli complex of fertility deities who
personified

\[Mexico\]. According to some traditions, the dual the maguey plant and
the intoxicating drink principle personified in a bisexual force which
the brewed from it, pulque or octli. Also (2) Tochtli.

Aztecs believed to be the only reality, all else being illusory.
Ometeotl rules in the highest (thirteenth) heaven, Omeyocan (place of
duality) **O'meal**

which rests above sun, moon, wind and other Tribal spirit. Na'kwaxdax
Indian \[British Colum-elements. Ometeotl impregnated itself to
engen-bia, Canada\]. The chief of the ancients who lives der the four
TEZCATLIPOCAS (aspects of the sun).

in "Narrow Entrance at Open Plain" and whose Another female aspect,
COATLICUE, gave birth to siblings are the "myth people."

the national Aztec god HUITZILOPOCHTLI. No formal cult existed for
Ometeotl, but he was considered to be present in every aspect of ritual.

**OMETECUHTLI** *(two lord)* *See also* TONACATECUHTLI and
TONACACIHUATL.

**ORIGIN** Toltec-Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. Supreme deity.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 750 to Spanish conquest circa AD
1500 but probably **Omichle**

much earlier.

Primordial principle. Phoenician (Hellenic). The **SYNONYMS**
Olin-Tonatiuh.

element of darkness in chaos which fuses, or con-CENTER(S) OF CULT None.

sorts, with POTHOS to engender the spiritual and **ART**

**REFERENCES** codex illustrations; stone physical elements of the
cosmos.

carvings.

**LITERARY SOURCES** pre-Columbian codices.

**Onuava**

The supreme being of Aztec religion, the god Fertility goddess. Celtic
(Gallic). Associated with represents dual aspects of all living things
and of the earth and known only from inscriptions.

the fecundity of the natural world. One of the group classed as the
OMETEOTL complex. Probably of Toltec origin, "he" is perceived as
androg-Onuris *\[Greek\]*

ynous. He has no sanctuaries, but is personified in God of hunting and
war. Egyptian. Onuris is first the moment of birth, or in the conception
of life.

known from This, near Abydos in Upper Egypt.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p249}234 **Opo**

In later times his main cult center was at Saman-Orcus

nud in the Nile delta. His consort is the lion god-Chthonic underworld
god. Roman. Modeled on dess Mekhit. Onuris is generally depicted in the
Greek god HADES.

human form as a bearded figure wearing a crown with four plumes and
wielding a spear or occasionally holding a rope. He is sometimes
accom-Ordog

panied by Mekhit in iconography. Seen as a Chthonic malevolent god.
Pre-Christian Hun-hunter who caught and slew the enemies of RE, garian.
After Christianization he became syn-the Egyptian sun god, some legends
place him cretized with the devil.

close to the battle between HORUS and SETH. In classical times, Onuris
became largely syncretized with the Greek war god ARES. Also Anhuret
**Oreades**

(Egyptian).

Animistic spirits of the mountains. GrecoRoman. Female personalities
assigned the **Opo**

guardianship of mountains by the great gods.

God of the ocean. Akan \[Ghana, West Africa\].

Invoked by travelers to ensure their safety.

One of the sons of the creator god NYAME, he is also considered to be
the god of the great inland lakes and rivers of Ghana.

**Ori**

*(mind)*

God of wisdom. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West Africa\].

The deity who, in heaven, guides the soul but who also acts as a
personal guardian, controlling **Opochtli**

*(left)*

individual mental ability, so that one person Minor god of lake
fishermen and hunters. Aztec becomes wise and another foolish.

(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the
TLALOC complex.

**Orisanla**

Sky god. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West Africa\]. Delegated **Ops**

by OLODUMARE as a creator of earth and living Goddess of harvests.
Greco-Roman. Honored in things.

an annual festival on August 25. She is also concerned with regulating
the proper growth of seeds. A sanctuary is dedicated to her in the
*Regia* **Oro**

in Rome.

God of war. Polynesian \[Tahiti\]. One of the sons of TANGAROA.

**Oraios** *(wealth)*

Primordial deity. Gnostic Christian. One of the **Orotalt**

androgynous elements born to YALDABAOTH, the Tutelary god. Pre-Islamic
Arabian. Thought to prime parent, and ruler of the seven heavens of
equate with the northern Arabian god RUDA chaos in Gnostic mythology.

(Ruldaiu). Mentioned by Herodotus in Hellenic

[]{#index_split_005.html#p250}**OSIRIS** 235

times as a supreme god and possibly syncretized **SYNONYMS** none, but
many epithets are applied, with DIONYSOS.

reflecting the universality of his cult.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** many throughout Egypt but chiefly at Abydos
(Ibdju) in Upper Egypt and **Orthia**

Busiris (Djedu) in the Nile delta of Lower Mother goddess. Sparta.
Locally worshiped and Egypt. Other important sanctuaries are located
probably soon syncretized with the more widely at Biga (Senmet) in Upper
Egypt south of recognized maternal deities of Asia Minor such as Aswan,
and at the Karnak complex of Thebes.

KYBELE.

Outside Egypt there is a major sanctuary at Philae in Greece.

**ART REFERENCES** innumerable sculptures, stone **Orunmila**

reliefs, wall paintings and papyrus illustrations.

God of destiny. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West Africa\].

**LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid Texts; coffin texts He accompanied the
creator god OLODUMARE at including the *Book of the Dead,* etc.

the creation of the world and when the destinies of mankind were
decided. He is consulted in an Osiris is among the most significant and
widely oracular capacity at IFA and makes decisions on revered deities
of the Egyptian pantheon. Accord-such matters as choice of sacrificial
animals. He is ing to the genealogy drawn up by the priests at also a
god of healing and in many households Heliopolis, he was born at Rosetau
in the necrop-enjoys personal shrines which include palm nuts, olis
(gate of the underworld) of Memphis. His fragments of ivory and sea
shells.

parents were GEB and NUT and he was the eldest of four siblings
including his sister and consort ISIS, his adversary SETH and younger
sister NEPH-Osande

THYS. Isis bore the god HORUS having impreg-Guardian deity. Ovimbundu
\[central Angola, nated herself with the semen of Osiris after his
southwest Africa\]. A benign elderly god who death. Though Osiris is
most closely linked with forms an integral part of ancestor worship.
Con-Isis, he is also associated with ANUBIS, the mor-sidered to be the
founder of each family lineage.

tuary god of embalming and the scorpion-like mortuary goddess SERKET.

Osiris is depicted in human form but often **Osanobua**

tightly wrapped in mummy linen with only his Creator god. Edo \[Benin,
West Africa\]. The arms free, He holds the crook and flail. His father
of the god OLOKUN, he is regarded as a crown, the *atef*, is
distinctive, consisting of the benevolent deity controlling prosperity,
health conical white crown of Lower Egypt framed by and happiness.

tall plumes and rams' horns. Often his skin is colored green. Osiris was
perceived as the counterpart in death of the sun god RE.

**OSIRIS**

As a grain god, Osiris was worshiped in the **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
Chthonic god of the under-form of a sack filled with seed which sprouted
world, also a corn or vegetation god.

green. He is also depicted by models with articu-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 3000 BC until lated members which women paraded through the end of
Egyptian history circa AD 400.

the streets at festivals and manipulated to demon-

[]{#index_split_005.html#p251}236 **Ostara**

strate the god's virility. His relationship with the term Easter, she
equates with the Anglo-Saxon Egyptian kingship was crucial. Each king
was the deity EOSTRE.

divine embodiment of Horus in life, but became Osiris on his death.

The Osirian legend is known from pure Egypt-Ostaraki *(covering)*

ian textual sources and from an embellished Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-account of the Greek writer Plutarch. The latter
dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

describes how Osiris was persuaded by Seth to step into an exactly
fitting sarcophagus during a drunken party. The coffin was nailed tight
and **Osun**

thrown into the Nile. It was washed ashore at River goddess. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\].

Byblos in the Lebanon where it became encased The daughter of Oba Jumu
and Oba Do and the in the trunk of a growing tree. Eventually, the
consort of the god SHANGO. The guardian deity trunk was cut down and
incorporated as a pillar in of the river Osun, revered particularly in
the the palace of the local ruler. After years of search-towns and
villages along the banks of the river ing, Isis found Osiris and brought
his body home.

where sacred weapons are kept in her shrines.

She breathed life into it and impregnated herself Also a goddess of
healing. She is worshiped par-with Osiris's semen. She bore his son
Horus.

ticularly by women and is honored in an annual Meanwhile Seth found the
body and once more festival, the *Ibo-Osun,* during which new cultic
destroyed it by hacking it into fourteen pieces priestesses are
selected.

and scattering them along the Nile valley. With the exception of
Osiris's penis, which Seth had thrown to a crocodile, Isis found all the
pieces **OTHIN**

*(all father)*

and buried them at the sites of various sanctuar-ORIGIN Nordic
(Icelandic) and Germanic. Head ies. She restored the penis with a
replica which of the Aesir sky gods and principal god of subsequently
became a focus of the Osirian cult.

victory in battle. God of the dead.

The scattering of the body was allegorized with **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** Viking period (circa the winnowing and scattering of grain in
the AD 700) and earlier through to Christianization fields.

(circa AD 1100) and beyond.

The purely Egyptian account omits the inci-SYNONYMS Odin; Sigtyr (god of
victory); dent of the sarcophagus and the discovery at Byb-Val-father
(father of the slain); One-eyed; los. Isis is sometimes represented in
the form of a Hanga-god (god of the hanged); Farma-hawk being
impregnated by the erect phallus of god (god of cargoes); Hapta-god (god
of the dead god. The reference to the fate of the prisoners).

penis with a crocodile is also omitted. In the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Uppsala (Sweden).

Egyptian version, the god's phallus was buried at **ART REFERENCES**
various stone carvings.

Memphis.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose* *Edda* (Snorri);
*Historia Danica* (Saxo); votive inscriptions.

**Ostara**

Sun goddess. Germanic. Associated with the Othin is the chief among the
Viking AESIR sky coming of spring and one of the derivations of the
gods, the lord of hosts and god of victory who

[]{#index_split_005.html#p252}**Oxlahun Ti Ku** 237

lives in the Hall of Valhalla in Asgard. He rules As Wotan, the image of
Othin was popular-over an army of warrior spirits, the Valkyries.

ized by Richard Wagner in his epic operatic Othin peoples Valhalla with
chosen heroes, slain cycle "Der Ring des Nibelung." The god's myth-in
battle on earth, who will defend the realm of ical biography is,
however, most extensively the gods against the Frost Giants on the final
day drawn by the 12th-century Icelandic poet and of reckoning, Ragnarok,
the doom of the gods.

historian Snorri Sturluson. He refers to Othin Othin passes out magic
weapons to his selected as "a mighty one," but describes, in detail, how
earthly heroes including Sigmund the Volsung he was instrumental in the
breaking of impor-

(see also BAAL). In spite of his eminence Othin is tant oaths to the
giants. It was this shortcoming considered to be untrustworthy, a
breaker of that led eventually to the downfall of the Aesir promises. He
rides a winged eight-legged horse, pantheon.

Sleipnir, and is able to change shape at will, an indication that he
derives from an older, shamanistic religion.

**O-Toshi-No-Kami**

His symbol is the raven and his weapon is a God of harvests. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The son of spear carved with runes or treaties said, when
SUSANO-WO and Kamu-O-Ichi-Hime, he heads hurled by the god, to influence
the course of com-the pantheon of agricultural deities and is gener-bat.
He is also symbolized by a knotted device, the ally the guardian of rice
fields.

*valknut*, probably representing his power to bind or unbind the minds
of warriors and thus influence the outcome of battle. Othin is perceived
as **Ouranos**

a *shaman*, his constant desire the pursuit of occult Primordial god of
heaven. Greek. The creator and knowledge through communication with the
incestuous consort of the earth mother GAIA with dead. He wanders the
earth disguised as a traveler, whom he engendered six giant
sons---OKEANOS, and once pierced himself with his own spear and Koeos,
Kreos, HYPERION, IAPETOS

and

hung himself from the World Tree, Yggdrasill, to KRONOS---and six
daughters---Klymene, RHEA, this end. He gave an eye to the god MIMIR as
pay-THEA, THETIS, MNEMOSYNE and Phoebe---the ment for permission to
drink from the well of twelve collectively being known as the TITANS.

knowledge which rises from a spring beneath the Fearing their power,
Ouranos hurled them into tree.

the abyss of Tartaros and chained them up.

Othin has links with the goddess FREYJA in literature. The goddess
SKADI, wife of NJORD in some legends, was reputed also to have borne
**Owiot**

children to Othin, thus linking him with the Moon god. Luiseno Indian
\[California, USA\].

VANIR gods. Adam of Bremen reports a special The ancestral deity of the
tribe.

festival of the gods in Uppsala when men and animals were slaughtered
and hung in trees. Followers of Othin were also burnt on funeral pyres.

**Oxlahun Ti Ku**

Othin is thought to have evolved as a syncretiza-Sky gods. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-tion of the Germanic war gods WODAN and
ico\]. The collective name for a group of thirteen TIWAZ. He was the
patron god of a fanatical war-celestial deities who are probably still
invoked by rior cult, the Berserks.

Mesoamerican Indians today.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p253}238 **Oya**

**Oya**

**O-Yama-Tsu-Mi**

River goddess. Yoruba \[Nigeria, West Africa\]. The God of mountains.
Shinto \[Japan\]. The most sen-consort of the god SHANGO, she is the
guardian ior apotheosis of mountains in Japan, he is one of deity of the
river Niger. Also a goddess of storms the sons of IZANAGI and IZANAMI
and is worshiped and thunder. Her sacred animal is the buffalo and
extensively.

her presence is symbolized by its horns.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p254}P

6

**Pa-bil-sag**

2\. Goddess. An incarnation of LAKSMI, the con-Tutelary god of Isin.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and sort of an *avatara* of VISŇU. She is
depicted as Babylonian-Akkadian). The consort of the god-emanating from
the *padma* or lotus ( *Nelumbium* dess NIN'INSINNA. Identified with the
city of Larak *speciosum*) which is the symbol of creation and one
(lost), texts describe Pabilsag journeying to Nippur of the most
important iconographic devices in and presenting the god ENLIL with
gifts. He is given Hinduism. Also KAMALA.

the epithet of "the wild bull with multicolored legs."

**Padmantaka** *(destructive to the lotus)* **Paca-Mama**

*(earth mother)*

God. Buddhist. A *dikpala* or guardian of the west-Chthonic earth
goddess. Inca (pre-Columbian ern direction. Color: red. Attributes:
jewel, red South America) \[highlands of Peru\]. Worshiped lotus, prayer
wheel and sword. Three-headed.

extensively by farmers but now largely syncretized with the Christian
Virgin Mary.

**Padmapani**

*(with lotus in hand)*

God. Buddhist. A BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-

**Pachacamac**

*(earth creator)*

designate, and a distinct form of AVALOKITES-Creator god. South American
Indian \[Lima VARA. Color: white or red. Attributes: book, image region
of Peru\]. Near the town of Pachacamac is of Amitabha on the crown, knot
of hair, lotus, the site of a huge pyramidal sanctuary dedicated rosary,
trident and waterjar. Three-eyed.

to the god. In origin he is pre-Inca but the Inca rulers who took over
the region allowed his worship to continue; eventually he became
syn-Padmatara

*(lotus Tara)*

cretized with the god VAIRACOCHA.

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana).

**Padma** *(lotus)*

**Padmosnisa**

1\. Snake god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of God. Buddhist.
Apparently connected with the a group of seven MAHANAGAS. Attributes:
rosary guardian deities or *dikpalas* and associated with and water jar.
Three-eyed.

the western direction. Color: red.

239

[]{#index_split_005.html#p255}240 **Paean**

**Paean**

See PAIAWON.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Palace of Jade Vacuity on Cheung Chau Island.

**ART REFERENCES** paintings and sculptures.

**Pahteeatl**

*(medicine lord)*

**LITERARY SOURCES** various philosophical and Minor fertility god.
Aztec (classical Mesoameri-religious texts, mostly inadequately
researched can) \[Mexico\]. One of the group of deities known and
untranslated.

as the Ometochtli complex and concerned with the brewing of the
alcoholic drink pulque from As first general of heaven's armies, he is
regarded the maguey plant.

as a guardian of the Chinese state comparable to KUAN TI, but older in
mythology and identified with the north. According to tradition he lived
**Paiawon**

circa 2000 BC and was deified during the war War god. Greek and Cretan.
Known from Knos-between the Chou and Shang dynasties. During his sos and
mentioned in the *Iliad* (Homer) as Paean.

mortal lifetime he was allegedly responsible for the introduction of
flood control and land drainage systems. Alternatively, he spent much of
his life **Painal** *(hasty)*

seeking a Buddhist-style perfection on the moun-Minor god of war. Aztec
(classical Mesoameri-tain of Wu T'ang Shan. He was taken to heaven to
can) \[Mexico\]. One of the group of deities assist the established
pantheon in defeating two known as the HUITZILPOCHTLI complex to
traditional monsters, the tortoise and the snake.

whom sacrifice of captured prisoners was regu-Pak Tai hurled them into a
deep chasm and, on his larly offered.

return, was made first lord of heaven.

He is also titled emperor of the north. His full title, Hsuan T'ien
Shang Ti, means superior ruler **Pajainen**

of the *dark* heaven, as distinct from the *moving* God. Pre-Christian
Finnish. The deity who kills and more accessible heaven ruled by the god
the great bull in Finnish legend.

HUANG TI. Before his deification, the north of China was believed to be
ruled by the tortoise, the so-called dark warrior.

**Pajonn**

Pak Tai is also closely connected with death and God of thunder.
Pre-Christian Lappish. The fertility. He is a guardian of society who
may name is derived from "the one who dwells in the descend from heaven
to restore stability in times heaven."

of unrest or destruction. On the island of Cheung Chau he is believed to
have been responsible for ending a plague which afflicted the islanders
at **PAK TAI**

the end of the nineteenth century.

**ORIGIN** Taoist (Chinese). Astral god of war.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** probably from Shang Dynasty (second
millennium BC) until **Pakhet**

present.

Goddess of hunting. Egyptian. Known locally **SYNONYMS** Hsuan T'ien
Shang Ti; Shang-ti yeh from the eastern desert regions with a sanctuary
(Taiwanese).

at Beni Hasan.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p256}**Pancanana** 241

**Palaemon**

feet of a goat, is typically shown with phallic con-Minor sea god.
Greco-Roman. Originally Melik-notations and is reputed to live in caves.
Well-ertes, the son of Ino, Palaemon was deified by the known as a pipe
player, an interest stemming gods when his mother hurled herself from a
cliff from an infatuation with the nymph Syrinx, with her son in her
arms. According to versions of whom the earth goddess GAIA changed into
a the legend she was either insane or escaping the clump of reeds to
protect her from Pan's amorous wrath of Athanas, King of Thebes.

advances. The pipes of Pan are cut from hollow reeds and called the
*syrinx.* The name Pan may also be applied in a pluralistic sense. Pan's
repu-Palaniyantavan

tation extended to sudden frightening of travelers, Local god.
Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil). Known only whence derives the term "panic." Pan
is depicted from southern India and considered to be a form wearing a
garland of pine boughs and bearing the of SKANDA or of MURUKAN, who is
an old Tamil *syrinx* pipes and a shepherd's crook.

tribal snake god.

**Panao**

**Pales**

Creator god. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. Local deity wor-Pastoral goddess.
Roman. A guardian of flocks shiped in Ashkun villages in southwestern
Kafiris-and herds. Her festival was celebrated annually in tan. Also a
generic title for deities controlling the Rome on April 21.

natural world and said to live in the mountains.

These include Lutkari Panao (fertility), Saramun Panao (health), Plossa
Panao (rain and good **Pallas (Athene)**

health), Passamun Panao (rain and good health), Goddess. Greek. The full
name of the deity who Indermun Panao (fruit and wine), and Malek Panao
is thus Pallas of Athens. The origin and meaning (nut trees). These gods
were generally worshiped in of the word Pallas is unknown.

sacred open spaces where their wooden images *See also* ATHENA.

were regularly drenched with blood sacrifices.

**PAN**

**Pancabrahma**

**ORIGIN** Greco-Roman. God of shepherds and Collective name for five
aspects of SˇIVA. Hindu.

personification of undisciplined procreation in The five aspects are
Aghora, Isana, Sadyojata, nature.

Tatpurusa and Vamadeva. Also Isanadayas.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 800 BC and earlier until
Christianization circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** Consentes.

**Pancamukha-Patradeva**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Arcadia; Marathon (Attica).

God. Buddhist. A "bowl-god." Attributes: an alms **ART REFERENCES**
stone reliefs and carvings.

bowl in each of sixteen hands. Five-headed.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Theogony* (Hesiod), etc.

According to tradition, Pan is the son of HERMES

**Pancanana**

(Mercury) and a nymph, Penelope. One of the Demonic deity. Hindu
(Puranic). Regarded as a company of SATYRS, Pan possesses the horns and
form of the god SˇIVA possessing five faces, each

[]{#index_split_005.html#p257}242 **Pancaraksa** face having three eyes.
Depicted with the naked **Pao Kung**

body of an ascetic, wearing a necklace of snakes.

God of magistrates. Chinese. Lived as a mortal Shrines symbolize the god
with a stone, its top from AD 999-1062 during the Sung Dynasty.

painted red and usually placed beneath a tree.

Depicted with a dark face, implying impartiality, Pancanana is worshiped
extensively in Hindu vil-and wearing yellow and purple robes. Attributes
lages throughout Bengal where women make include a wooden scepter. He is
attended by two invocations and anoint the stones, particularly minor
deities, one holding his seal of office and when sickness strikes. There
is a belief that chil-the other holding the rod of punishment.

dren in the throes of epilepsy have been seized by the god.

**Papas**

Local god. Phrygian \[northwestern Turkey\].

**Pancaraksa**

*(five-fold protection)*

According to tradition, he inseminated a rock and Group of goddesses.
Buddhist. Five tutelary or so engendered the hermaphrodite being
Agdistis.

guardian deities who personify protective spells or Later became
syncretized with ZEUS.

magic formulae. They are thus known as "spell goddesses."

**Papatuanuku**

Chthonic mother goddess. Polynesian (including Maori). According to
tradition she evolved **Pandara**

spontaneously in the cosmic night personified by Goddess. Buddhist. The
SAKTI of AMITABHA and TE PO and became the apotheosis of *papa,* the a
female BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-designate. She earth. In other traditions
she was engendered, originates from the Tantric syllable PAM. Color:
with the sky god RANGINUI, by a primordial rose. Attributes: blue lotus,
cup, knife and prayer androgynous being, ATEA. Paptuanuku and
Rang-wheel.

inui are regarded as the primal parents of the pantheon who, through a
prolonged period of intercourse, produced at least ten major deities as
**Paneu**

their children. In Maori culture Papatuanuku, like A collective term for
seven gods. Kafir \[Afghan-all deities, is represented only by
inconspicuous, istan\]. The divine brothers are cast as the hunters
slightly worked stones or pieces of wood and not and henchmen of the
supreme goddess DISANI.

by the large totems, which are depictions of Each is equipped with a
golden bow and quiver.

ancestors.

They are generally portrayed as merciless and malignant forces. Also
Paradik, Purron.

**Pap-nigin-gara**

*(lord of the boundary stone)* God of war. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Pansahi Mata

Akkadian). Syncretized with NINURTA.

Mother goddess. Hindu. A SAKTI and one of seven SAPTAMATARAS (mothers)
who in later Hinduism became regarded as of evil intent, inflicting
**Papsukkal**

sickness on children under the age of seven. Par-Messenger god.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-ticularly known from Bengal.

Akkadian). Identified in late Akkadian texts and

[]{#index_split_005.html#p258}**Parna-Savari** 243

known chiefly from Hellenistic Babylonian times.

**Parcae**

His consort is AMASAGNUL and he acts as both Goddesses of fate.
Greco-Roman. Originally a messenger and gatekeeper for the rest of the
pan-pair of birth goddesses, DECIMA and NONA, later theon. A sanctuary,
the *E-akkil, is* identified from joined by a goddess of death, MORTA.

the Mesopotamian site of Mkisˇ. He becomes syncretized with NINSˇUBUR.

**Parendi**

Minor goddess of prosperity. Hindu (Vedic).

**Paramasva**

*(great horse)*

Associated with the acquisition of wealth.

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). Considered to be a form of HAYAGRIVA depicted
with four legs and trampling the four major Hindu deities
under-Pariacaca

foot. Color: red. Attributes: arrow, bow, head of Weather god. Pre-Inca
central Andean \[South a horse, great lotus, lotus, staff and sword.
Three-America\]. The deity responsible for rain and eyed.

thunder, personified by the falcon.

**Paramita**

**Pariskaravasita**

*(control of purification)*

Descriptive name of a philosophical deity.

Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of Buddhist. Applied to one of
the group of VASITAS personifying the disciplines of spiritual twelve
whose spiritual father is RATNASAMBHAVA.

regeneration. Color: yellow. Attribute: jeweled Common attributes:
banner with a pearl, and staff.

a lotus.

**Parjanya**

*(rain giver)*

**Parasurama**

*(Rama-with-the-ax)*

God of rain. Hindu (Vedic). Became replaced Incarnation of the god
VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and by, or syncretized with, INDRA in later
Hin-Puranic). The sixth *avatara* of Visňu (see also duism, but in the
Vedas he is seen as a god of RAMA) in which form he saved the world from
an gentle, fructifying rain. May be regarded as an army of tyrannical
warriors. According to legend, ADITYA.

Rama, the son of a wise man, became a skilled bowman and in gratitude he
went to the Himalaya where he stayed, devoting himself to
**Parna-Savari**

*(dressed in leaves)*

SˇIVA. His consort is DHARANI. Though without Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An emanation of his bow, Rama acted as a champion of the
gods in AKSOBHYA and BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-designate.

a war against the demons and was rewarded with Also one of a group of
DHARANIS (deifications of an ax. In another legend, Visňu took the form
of literature). She is particularly recognized in the Parasurama to rid
the world of despotic rulers.

northwest of India. Her vehicle is GANESA This *avatara* appears in
human form, with surmounting obstacles. Color: yellow or green.

two arms and with an ax in the right hand. Other Attributes: arrow, ax,
bow, flower, noose, peacock attributes: arrow, bow, knife, skin and
sword. Also feather, skin and staff. She is depicted as having
Parasuramavatara.

three eyes and three heads.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p259}244 **Parsva**

**Parsva**

of interest, she pursues a life of self-denial until he Jain. The 23rd
*tirthankava* and therefore the finally appears to her as an old Brahman
and takes penultimate in the line of mythical salvation her as his
consort.

teachers. Possibly a historic person who lived in Parvati is depicted
with two arms when accom-the 8th century BC, he was succeeded by
Maha-panying Sˇiva, but four when standing alone; she viva or
Vardhamana, who was definitely a person may be elephantheaded or
carrying Ganesa as a in history. Parsva has been credited as the
myth-baby, and appears in many varieties. Attributes: ical founder of
Jainism.

conch, crown, mirror, ornamented head-band, rosary and occasionally a
lotus.

**Partula**

Minor goddess of birth. Roman. Concerned with **Pasupati**

*(lord of animals)*

parturition.

God of animals. Hindu \[India\]. His consort is Svaha and his son is
SANMUKHA. He is thought to have been derived from an earlier pre-Indo
Aryan **PARVATI**

*(daughter of the mountain)*

deity worshiped by the Indus Valley civilization as **ORIGIN** Hindu
(Epic and Puranic) \[India\].

a horned god with three faces, sitting surrounded Mother goddess.

by animals. In Hindu culture regarded as an **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa AD 400 until aspect of SˇIVA and depicted standing upon a present
times.

corpse.

**SYNONYMS** Sakti; Ahladini-Sadini; SATI; UMA.

Many epithets including Amba (mother); Aja (she goat); GAURI (corn
goddess aspect); **Patadharini**

*(bearing a cloth)*

BHUTAMATA (mother of goblins).

Goddess of passage. Buddhist. She watches over **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none specific.

curtains and doorways. Color: blue. Attribute: a **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures, chiefly in bronze curtain.

but also in stone; reliefs.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Ramayana* epic and various Puranic texts.

**Pattinidevi**

*(queen of goddesses)*

Mother goddess. Hindu (Singhalese) \[Sri Lanka\].

Parvati may have originated from the mountain A deification of Kannaki,
the consort of Kovolan tribes in the Himalaya. As a goddess of fertility
she who, according to ancient Tamil tradition, jour-is the youngest of
the benign aspects of the goddess neyed to the town of Madurai to sell a
gold anklet.

Sakti. She also appears as a reincarnation of Sati.

Through trickery she was convicted of theft and She is the daughter of
HIMAVAN (the Himalaya) executed, but was canonized. According to and
MENA, a sister of VISŇU and the younger sis-another tradition, she was
born from a mango ter of GANGA. She becomes the consort of the god
pierced by a sacred arrow. In southern India and SˇIVA and, as such,
personifies the extreme example Sri Lanka a goddess of chastity and
fidelity in of the devoted and steadfast Hindu wife. Her sons marriage.
Also a guardian against diseases, includ-include GANESA and SKANDA.

ing measles and smallpox. She is associated with She is presented to
Sˇiva, the ascetic, as a beau-fire-walking rituals. Attributes:
cobra-hood tiful dancing girl. On becoming aware of his lack behind the
head, and a lotus.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p260}**Penates** 245

**Pavana**

*(purifier)*

goddess, HINA, since one of her alternative God of the winds. Hindu. His
consort is Anjana.

names is Hina-Ai-Malama (Hina who devours Also VAYU.

the moon).

**Pax**

**Pellon Pekko**

Spirit of peace. Roman. Became well-known as Vegetation god.
Pre-Christian Finnish. The deity Pax Romana and Pax Augusta from the
second responsible for the germination and harvesting century BC and was
accorded a shrine on of barley used to make beer. The first brewing is
the Field of Mars. Depicted as a young woman dedicated to Pellon Pekko.
He may have largely bearing a cornucopia, an olive branch and a become
syncretized with St. Peter under Christ-sheaf of corn.

ian influence.

*See also* PEKKO.

**Peitho**

Goddess of persuasion. Greek. A minor atten-Pemba

*(great thing)*

dant of the goddess APHRODITE.

Creator god. Bambara and Mande \[Mali, West Africa\]. He was created out
of the empty or *Fu* and his first task was to form the egg of the
**Peju'lpe**

world. He descended to earth as an acacia seed Guardian spirits.
Yukaghir \[southeastern Siberia\].

( *Acacia albida*) which first grew to a mighty tree Attendant deities
who look after the well-being of and then died. From the wood Pemba
generated animals in their care. They are benevolent toward human souls
and a female being whom he the hunter so long as he observes certain
regula-impregnated to engender all human and animal tions and kills only
when necessary.

life. His brother is the god FARO, creator of the river Niger.

**Pekko**

God of cereal crops. Pre-Christian Finnish and **Pen Annwen**

Baltic regions. In Finland he is PELLON PEKKO

Underworld god. Celtic (Welsh). Virtually syn-and specifically a god of
barley used in brewing onymous with PWYLL and PRYDERI.

beer. In Estonia he is a corn god whose image, made of wax, was kept in
the corn chest. He was originally honored on a day taken over by a
**Penates**

Christian festival for St. Peter.

Hearth deities. Roman. These gods are a peculiarly Roman innovation,
unknown to the Greeks.

The *penates*, chosen individually by the head of **Pele**

the household, oversaw the domestic affairs of Volcano goddess.
Polynesian \[Hawaii\]. Accord-most Roman families. They were considered
suf-ing to tradition she arrived in Hawaii in a canoe, ficiently
important that, if a move was anticipated, having sailed from Tahiti.
She may derive they were taken to and established in the new res-locally
from the more familiar Polynesian moon idence *a priori*. They are
represented in the form

[]{#index_split_005.html#p261}246 **Perende** of small statues made of
anything from clay to The daughter of ZEUS and the corn goddess gold
according to the wealth of the owner, and DEMETER, Persephone's
*persona* is intricately were provided with regular offerings of scraps
of entwined with that of her mother; the two may food.

be seen as aspects of each other, though Persephone's name suggests an
earlier, independent identity as a major goddess in prehistory.
Perse-Perende

phone is perceived as Kore, the immature daugh-Storm god. Pre-Christian
Albanian. In the ter, or aspect, of the corn mother, but also ancient
Illyrian culture his presence was specifically as mistress of the dead
and ill-fated announced by thunder and lightning. The name consort of
the underworld god HADES-Aidoneus subsequently became adopted to
identify God in or Aides.

the Christian sense.

According to tradition Persephone leaves her mother's house to pick
flowers with a group of girls, the OKEANIDES. As she bends to collect a
**Perkons**

particularly beautiful bloom, the earth suddenly God of thunder.
Pre-Christian Latvian. Depicted opens and the god of the underworld
rides out in armed with iron weapons, he is also a fertility god a
chariot drawn by black horses to seize her and who brings beneficial
rain. Also Perkunas abduct her to Hades, where she is to reign as his
(Lithuanian).

queen. The flower meadow is traditionally believed to lie on the island
of Sicily close to the Lago di Pergus at Enna, though other sites,
**Perkunas**

See PERKONS.

including one near Syracuse, contest the claim.

Subsequently, Demeter wanders the earth in fruitless search for her
child. Eventually she **Perse**

locates Persephone and HERMES is allowed to Chthonic underworld goddess.
Greek. The con-bring her back to the upper world but, because sort of
the sun god Helios and the mother of Persephone has tasted the
pomegranate of death, Kirke and Pasiphae, she personifies the under-she
may return only for two thirds of each year.

world aspects of the moon. Also Neaira.

When Persephone returns to her mother as Kore, the girl, nature
flourishes, but when she descends to Hades as his queen, Demeter is
distraught and **PERSEPHONE**

angry and the living world shrivels and dies.

**ORIGIN** Greek. Chthonic goddess of death.

According to one legendary source, Zeus in the **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1200 BC to form of a snake raped Persephone and sired
circa AD 400.

DIONYSOS, though Dionysos's mother is more **SYNONYMS** KORE;
Persephassa; Pherrephatta generally regarded as SEMELE.

(Attic); PROSERPINA (Roman).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Eleusis; temple to Demeter and Persephone in
Syracuse.

**Perun**

*(striker)*

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and reliefs.

God of thunder. Pre-Christian Slavonic (Balkan).

**LITERARY**

**SOURCES** *Hymn to Demeter, Iliad* His attribute is a club and his
sacred animal is the (Homer); *Theogony* (Hesiod).

bull. He is known to have been worshiped at Kiev.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p262}**Pidray** 247

**Peruwa**

blue, yellow or white. Attributes: noose, prayer Horse god. Hittite.
Known only from inscrip-wheel and staff surmounted by a skeleton.

tions. Also Pirwa.

**Picullus**

**Phanebal**

*(face of Baal)*

Chthonic underworld god. Romano-Celtic Minor attendant god. Western
Semitic. A youthful (Prussian). He becomes syncretized with the devil
warrior deity with right hand raised who appears on in Christian times.

coins struck at Ascalon from the time of Augustus.

**Picvu'cin**

**Phanes**

God of hunters. Chukchee \[Eastern Siberia\]. A Primordial sun god.
Greek. The first god to emerge diminutive figure who rides on a sled
drawn by from the cosmic egg engendered by KRONOS, he mice. He is the
guardian of reindeer and other personifies light emerging from chaos.
According animals and is invoked by sacrifice, usually of to one
tradition, his daughter is NYX, the night.

camp dogs.

**Phorkys**

**Pidari**

*(snake-catcher)*

Minor sea god. Greek. According to Hesiod, he is One of the consorts of
SˇIVA. Hindu (Puranic and the son of PONTOS and GAIA. The consort of a
later). A benevolent NAVASAKTI. The cult of sea-serpent, Keto, and the
father of the Gorgons Pidari probably evolved in the sixth and seventh
and Graii. Also Phorkos.

centuries AD and is generally restricted to southern India. She is
considered an aspect of the god-Phosphoros

dess KALI and is invoked in many villages to God of the morning star.
Greek. His mother is ward off evil and demons. She has most of the E

attributes of Kali and may also have snakes OS, the dawn, and he is
depicted as a naked youth running ahead of her, carrying a torch. In
around her breasts, but may additionally be Roman culture he becomes
Lucifer.

represented by a stone. Her cult moved at one time and reached a climax
in eastern India between the eighth and twelfth centuries.

**Phul Mata**

Attributes: cup, fire, noose and trident. Also Mother goddess. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). A Pitali; Kala-Pidari.

SAKTI who in later Hinduism became one of the SAPTAMATARAS regarded as
of evil intent, inflicting sickness on children under seven years old.

**Pidray**

Particularly known from Bengal.

Minor fertility goddess. Canaanite and Phoenician. Mentioned in epic
creation texts and treaties at Ugarit (Ras Sˇamra) as the first daughter
of **Phyi-Sgrub**

*(the external one)*

BAAL. She is the consort of BAAL SAPON, the God. Buddhist-Lamaist
\[Tibet\]. A form of the mother of Tly and may be the goddess Peraia god
YAMA who rides a buffalo or a bull. Color: described by the Greek writer
Philo.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p263}248 **Pietas**

**Pietas**

**Pitao Cozobi**

Minor god. Roman. A sanctuary dedicated to him Maize god. Zapotec
(classical Mesoamerican) circa 191 BC is still in existence in Rome. He

\[Mexico\]. Worshiped by the Monte Alban cul-became Pietas Augusta and
is associated with fam-ture of Zapotec-speaking peoples in the Valley of
ily solidarity and patriotism.

Oaxaca. Sculptures were often adorned with casts of maize ears.

**Pilumnus**

*(staker)*

Minor guardian god. Roman. Concerned with **Piyusaharana**

the protection of an infant at birth. A ceremony Obscure physician god.
Hindu (Epic and to honor the deity involved driving a stake into
Puranic). Identified in the texts as the eighteenth the ground.

of the thirty-nine minor incarnations of the god VISŇU; said to be a
"carrier of nectar."

**Pinikirz**

Mother goddess. Elamite \[Iran\]. Known only **Pluto**

from inscriptions.

God of the underworld. Roman. Derived from the Greek model of HADES, he
abducted the daughter of CERES, PROSERPINA, to reign as his **PISTIS**

*(faith)*

queen. The three-headed dog Cerberus was **ORIGIN** Gnostic Christian.
Primordial female force.

set to guard the gate of Hades and through **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
probably circa 200

the kingdom flowed the two rivers of death, the BC to circa AD 400.

Cocytus and the Acheron which could be crossed **SYNONYMS** Pistis
Sophia.

only by the ferryman Charon. According to **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
undefined cells in areas of Roman tradition, the entrance to the
underworld early Christian influence.

was at Avernus in Rome where the Christian **ART REFERENCES** none.

church of St. Maria del Inferno was built.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Nag Hammadi* codices.

*See also* HADES.

The exact origin of Pistis is never made clear and the *Nag Hammadi*
narratives are in places con-Plutos

fused and contradictory. It is, however, an unmis-Minor god of riches.
Greek. A son of DEMETER

takably female principle typical of most religions who was abandoned in
childhood and reared by in their concept of the origin of the world.
Pistis the goddess of peace, EIRENE, who is sometimes appears to be a
benign female element among the depicted holding him in her lap. Plutos
was primordial immortals who ruled before even the blinded by ZEUS
because of his discrimination in cosmos was created. She is closely
allied with favor of the righteous.

SOPHIA (wisdom). Pistis appears to have been formed out of infinity
before the "shadow" which was to evolve into chaos, and from which the
cos-Poeninus

mos would take shape, defined itself within lim-Mountain god.
Romano-Celtic (Continental Euro-itless light.

pean). Known locally from the alpine regions and *See also* SOPHIA and
YALDABAOTH.

generally thought to be assimilated with JUPITER.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p264}**POSEIDON** 249

**Poleramma**

**SYNONYMS** Pon-yu'lec (something got dark); Plague goddess. Telegu
\[India\]. Associated with Pon-o'moc (something has become good);
smallpox and offered blood sacrifices.

Pon-ti'boi (something makes rain); Cu'kun.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** no fixed sanctuaries.

**ART REFERENCES** none known.

**Pollux**

**LITERARY SOURCES** Jochelson *Memoirs of the* Horse god. Roman.

*American Natural History Society* Vol. 10 (1905).

*See also* POLYDEUKES.

Pon is a vague and indefinite creator spirit who controls all visible
phenomena of nature. As far as can **Poluknalai**

be ascertained, no specific cult was ever addressed to Goddess of
animals. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. Locally this deity; he seems to be a
remote figure, largely out revered, with the goddess DISANI, among Askun
of touch with everyday life. No invocations or villages in the southwest
of Kafiristan.

prayers are addressed to Pon, nor are sacrifices.

**Polydeukes**

**Pontos**

Horse god. Greek. One of the Dioskouroi twins; God of the sea. Greek.
His mother and consort is the other is Kastor. According to tradition,
they G

are together associated with a Spartan cult AIA and he is the father of
the sea gods NEREUS

and P

whence they originated. The pair probably derive HORKYS.

from the Indo-European model of the ASVINS in Vedic mythology. Kastor is
mortal while Poly-Pore

deukes is immortal. Thus, during battle, Kastor is Creator god. Guyanan
Indian \[South America\].

mortally wounded but, even in death, the two Engendered the earth and
all living things. Also brothers remain inseparable. They rescue
indi-Pura.

viduals from distress and danger, particularly at sea, and are thought
to be embodied in the elec-trical discharges known as St. Elmo's Fire.
Also **Portunus**

Castor and POLLUX (Roman).

God of passage. Roman. The deity responsible for guarding the entrance
of the city and the **Pomona**

house alike. He was celebrated in the *Portunalia* Goddess of orchards
and gardens. Roman. Con-festival, held annually on August 17, when keys
sort of VERTUMNUS generally represented by gar-were thrown into a fire
to bless them. He is also den implements and offered fruits and flowers.

the guardian of the Tiber estuary, the main access by sea to the city of
Rome.

**PON**

*(something)*

**ORIGIN** Yukaghir \[central Siberia\]. Supreme cre-POSEIDON

ator god.

**ORIGIN** Greek. God of the sea and mariners.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from prehistoric **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
from circa 1600 BC

times until circa AD 1900.

through Minoan Crete (art evidence only) until

[]{#index_split_005.html#p265}250 **Posis Das** circa AD 400.
**SYNONYMS** Poseidaon (Myce-There exist ruins of a striking Poseidon
sanc-naean); Poteidan (Dorian).

tuary, constructed of white marble, on the cliffs of **CENTER(S) OF
CULT** Cape Sunium \[southern Cape Sunium at the extreme southern tip of
Greece\]; Pylos \[Crete\]; Mount Mykale Greece, past which all ships
sail when making for

\[Turkey\]; early sanctuary on the island of Athens. Regattas were held
there in honor of the Kalauria; otherwise widespread through areas god
and he was particularly invoked during the of Greco-Roman influence,
particularly at tuna-hunting season which was conducted using Berytus
\[Syria\].

traditional trident harpoons.

**ART REFERENCES** sculpture, plaques, coins, etc.

On Argos horses were sacrificed to Poseidon, **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Iliad* (Homer); *Theogony* drowned in a whirlpool, while on Pylos and
else-

(Hesiod), etc.

where he received the offering of slaughtered bulls.

Poseidon is perceived as a sea god, one of the three sons of KRONOS and
RHEA. His brothers are ZEUS and HADES. He is the father of Theseus
**Posis Das**

who became king of Athens, and is also linked Sky god. Greek. In
pre-Hellenic times the con-with the ancestral king of the city,
Erechtheus, sort of the earth mother GAIA. One of the pri-whom he
supposedly rammed into the ground.

mordial partnership identified in *Theogony* Among his other sons are
Neleus, king of Pylos, (Hesiod). He later becomes syncretized with and
Pelias of Iolkos in Thessaly. He is also, by tra-ZEUS.

dition, the father of the ancestors of the Aeolian and Boeotian races.

The horse is sacred to him and he is said to **Pothos**

have inseminated the ground from which was Primordial being. Phoenician
(Hellenic). Accord-conceived the first horse. Poseidon's chief consort
ing to the cosmogony, he is desire, and consorts is AMPHITRITE, but
other consorts emphasize the with OMICHLE, darkness, to engender out of
affinity with horses. They include the infamous chaos the spiritual
force Aer, and its living physi-Gorgon, Medusa, from whose dead body
came cal manifestation Aura.

the winged horse Pegasus and the warrior Chrysaor. A liaison with the
goddess ERINYS produced another fabulous winged horse, Areon. In
**Potina**

a parallel legend Areon's mother is DEMETER

Minor goddess. Roman. Associated with the safe while in the guise of a
mare.

drinking ability of infants.

Poseidon appears never to have been envisaged in youthful form, but
always as an elderly, bearded deity who carries the emblem of a trident
harpoon.

**Poxlom**

According to tradition, Zeus took the sky, Posei-God of disease. Mayan
(Tzeltal Indian, classical don the sea, and Hades the underworld, while
the Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Apparently perceived earth was shared
between all three. Poseidon was as a star in the sky or a ball of fire.
He may also be a popular oracular deity, suggested in one legend to
depicted as a fertility god shelling maize or as a be the first keeper
of Delphi. Another oracle at fisherman, doctor, musician or hunter. An
image Cape Tainaron is dedicated to Poseidon.

of the god was discovered in the Christian church

[]{#index_split_005.html#p266}**Prajnavardhani** 251

in Oxchuc, and the Indians were forced to revoke **Prajapati**

*(lord of creatures)*

and spit on the icon before it was publicly burnt.

Primordial being. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). In the Vedic legends
he is described variously as the creator of the world and the creator
**Prabhakari**

*(light-maker)*

of heaven and earth. He is an androgynous being Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Vajrayana). One of sev-who impregnated himself by fusing elements of
eral deified BHUMIS recognized as different spir-mind and speech. In
later epics he is the guardian itual spheres through which a disciple
passes.

deity of the sexual organ. Prajapati is also a name Color: red.
Attributes: sun disc on a great lotus of the god BRAHMA in later
Hinduism.

and staff.

**Prajna**

*(wisdom)*

**Prabhasa**

*(shining dawn)*

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Regarded as the Attendant god. Hindu (Epic
and Puranic). One of SAKTI of a number of Mahayana gods, or specifi-a
group of VASU deities answering to the god cally of ADIBUDDHA.

INDRA. Attributes: cup, hook, Sakti and staff.

**Prajnantaka**

**Pracanda**

God. Buddhist. One of the

*(furious)*

*dikpalas,* guardians of the southern direction. Color: white.
Attributes: Distinct form of the goddess DURGA. Hindu jewel, lotus,
sword, trident and white staff.

(Epic and Puranic). One of a group of NAVADURGAS or "nine durgas."

**Prajnaparamita**

Goddess. Buddhist. The personification of the reli-Pradhana

*(most important)*

gious text *Prajnaparamita* and the SAKTI of VAJRAD-Mother goddess.
Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One HARA. An emanation of the deity AKSOBHYA.
Also of a group of nine NAVASAKTIS who, in southern a philosophical
deity, the spiritual offspring of RAT-India, rank higher than the
SAPTAMATARAS.

NASAMBHAVA. The embodiment of transcendental intuition. She stands upon
a lotus. Color: white, reddish white or yellow. Attributes: blue lotus,
**Pradipatara**

book, cup, knife, jeweled staff and red lotus.

Minor goddess of light. Buddhist (Mahayana).

**Prajnapti**

*(teaching)*

**Pradyumna**

Goddess of learning. Jain \[India\]. One of sixteen God of love. Early
Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

India\]. The son of KRSNA and RUKMINI, and the elder brother of SAMA.
Equating with KAMADEVA, or Kama returned to life after being
**Prajnavardhani**

*(growth of wisdom)*

killed by SˇIVA. In later Hinduism regarded as an Deification of
literature. Buddhist. One of a *avatara* of VISŇU with consorts
including group of DHARANIS. Color: white. Attributes: MAYADEVI and
Kakudmati.

staff and sword on blue lotus.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p267}252 **Prakde**

**Prakde**

*(parade)*

**Prasuti**

Local deity. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. Known from Goddess. Hindu. The
daughter of Svayambhuva Ashkun villages in southwestern Kafiristan and
MANU and one of the consorts of DAKSA.

perhaps one of the seven divine PANAO or Paradik brothers.

**Pratibhanakuta** ( *excellent intelligence*) God. Buddhist. A
BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-

**Pramudita**

*(delighted)*

designate. Color: yellow or red. Attribute: sword Minor goddess.
Buddhist (Vajrayana). One on lotus.

of several deified BHUMIS recognized as different spiritual spheres
through which a **Pratibhanapratisamvit**

disciple passes. Color: red. Attributes: jewel and Goddess of context
analysis. Buddhist (Vajrayana).

staff.

One of a group of four. Color: green. Attributes: three-pronged staff
and bell.

**Pranasakti**

Goddess. Hindu. A terrifying deity ruling the **Pratisamvit**

*(analytical science)*

"centers of physical life." She stands upon a lotus.

Generic name for four goddesses. Buddhist Attribute: a cup filled with
blood.

(Vajrayana). The personifications of logical analysis.

**Pranidhanaparamita**

**Pratyangira**

*(whose speech is directed westward)* Philosophical deity. Buddhist.
Spiritual offspring Goddess of terrifying aspect. Hindu. She rides of
RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: blue. Attributes: jewel upon a lion. Attributes:
cup, drum, flaming hair, and sword on blue lotus.

snake noose and trident.

**Pratyusa** *(scorching)* **Pranidhanavasita**

*(control of abstract*

Attendant god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of *contemplation*)

a group of VASU deities answering to the god Minor goddess. Buddhist.
One of a group of INDRA. Attributes: hook, knife, Sakti and sword.

VASITAS personifying the disciplines of spiritual regeneration. Color:
yellow. Attributes: blue lotus and jeweled staff.

**Prende**

Goddess of love. Pre-Christian Albanian. The consort of the thunder god
Perendi who became **Prasannatara**

*(the gracious Tara)*

absorbed into Christianity as a saint.

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Regarded as a form of RATNASAMBHAVA
who tramples on Hindu gods including INDRA, BRAHMA, RUDRA **Priapos**

and Upendra. Color: yellow. Carries a large vari-Fertility god.
Greco-Roman and Phrygian. The ety of attributes. Three-eyed.

son of DIONYSOS and APHRODITE, he was also a

[]{#index_split_005.html#p268}**Proserpina** 253

guardian of mariners. Priapos was not regarded Prometheus, one of four
sons of the Titan as a significant deity in Greece until very late
IAPETOS and his consort Klymene, is probably times---during the
Macedonian period, circa best known as a heroic opponent of ZEUS. He
fourth to second century BC---and was only stole fire from the latter
and gave it to mankind locally popular during the Roman Empire as the
boon which separates the human race period. He is particularly known
from Phrygia from all other living creatures. Legend accords and is
depicted as a satyr-like creature with to Prometheus, and his brother
EPIMETHIUS

pronounced genitals.

(afterthought), the creation of mankind and the role of its protector,
in response to which Zeus created Pandora and her box of problems, set
**Priapus**

loose to afflict the human race. Zeus also God of the shade. Roman. A
rural deity whose imprisoned Prometheus by fastening him to a worship
appears to have been restricted to the great rock in the Caucasus
mountains with shores of the Hellespont and clearly derives from
adamantine chains and sending an eagle to con-the god PRIAPOS.

sume his liver. He was rescued by HERAKLES, who killed the eagle and
liberated the god from his torment.

**Prithivi**

See PRTHIVI.

**Promitor**

**Priti**

*(pleasure)*

Minor god of agriculture. Roman. Responsible Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). A daughter for the growth and harvesting of crops.

of DAKSA and consort of the god of love KAMADEVA. One of twelve SAKTIS
associated with the god VISŇU in his various incarnations.

**Pronoia**

*(forethought)*

Primordial being. Gnostic Christian. The feminine aspect of one of the
androgynous **Priyadarsana**

*(pleasant to the eye)*

principles born to YALDABAOTH, the prime par-Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-ent, and ruling the seven heavens of chaos in dant
of BUDDHAKAPALA.

Gnostic cosmogony. Also described in other Gnostic tracts as Protennoia,
the voice of the thought, and alternatively the voice of LOGOS

**PROMETHEUS** *(forethought)* (logic), who descends to earth in human
**ORIGIN** Greek. Heroic god and creator of man.

form and plays a part in the primordial salvation **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 800 BC and of the world.

probably earlier until Christianization circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** none.

**Proserpina**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** predominantly Athens.

Goddess of death. Roman but derived from **ART REFERENCES** sculptures,
relief carvings, etc.

a Greek model. Abducted by the underworld **LITERARY**

**SOURCES** *Theogony*

(Hesiod);

god PLUTO to reign as his queen (see PERSE-Aeschylus drama.

PHONE).

[]{#index_split_005.html#p269}254 **Proteus** **Proteus**

the once inseparable primordial cosmos until sep-Minor sea god. Greek.
Depicted as an old man arated by the god VARUNA. According to one who
attends Triton and whose principal concern illogical legend of Prthivi's
genealogy, she was the is the creatures of the oceans. He also has
oracu-daughter of Prithu who had granted the blessing lar powers. The
poet Cowper wrote: of life on earth and who, in her turn, had emerged

"In ages past old Proteus, with his droves from the arm of the corpse of
King Vena.

Of sea calves sought the mountains and the Prthivi is a chthonic or
earth goddess with groves."

whom the sky god Dyaus couples when he fertil-Also known as GLAUKOS,
NEREUS and izes her with rain. She is said to kiss the center of
PHORKYS.

the world and she symbolizes the eternal patience and resilience of the
earth, permitting herself to be abused without rancor. She is also a
vegetation **Providentia**

goddess, the source of all plant life. In some leg-Goddess of
forethought. Roman. Recognized ends Prthivi is perceived as the consort
of the rain from the reign of Tiberias in second century BC.

god INDRA, who protects her, and of lesser-known creation deities
including PARJANYA, Prajapait and **Proxumae**

Visvakarma. VISŇU strides over her body. As the Generic title of a group
of goddesses. Romano-inseparable partner of Dyaus she is rarely Celtic.
Personal guardian deities.

addressed alone, though in the *Atharva-veda* Dyaus is not mentioned.
Usually the pair are referred to as Dyavaprthivi. Though the goddess
**Prsni**

was present in early Indian culture, she persists Primordial earth
goddess. Hindu (Vedic). The so-into late Hinduism and may be associated
with called "dappled cow" of the *Rg Veda.* She is also Visňu as one of
the personifications of his Sakti *.*

perceived as the brightly colored *soma* stalk and is Many Hindus
worship Prthivi at dawn and linked with a male counterpart, also Prsni,
the before ploughing and sowing. In the Punjab, the dappled bull of the
sun.

first milk from a cow is offered to the goddess by allowing it to soak
into the earth. With similar **PRTHIVI**

*(earth mother)*

sentiment a dying man may be laid on the earth to be received by
Prthivi.

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Vedic) \[India\]. Mother goddess of earth.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1500 BC and probably earlier through
to present day.

**Prthu** *(broad)*

Creator god. Hindu (Vedic). The head of the **SYNONYMS** Bhudevi.

solar pantheon who introduced agriculture to the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none specific.

human race and who, in later Hinduism, is iden-ART REFERENCES sculptures
in bronze and other metals; stone reliefs, etc.

tified as an *avatara* of VISŇU.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Rg Veda* and other texts including the
*Atharva-veda.*

**Pryderi**

In Vedic literature Prthivi is the female aspect of Chthonic god. Celtic
(Welsh). The son of PWYLL

the creator god DYAUS PITAR. The two formed and RHIANNON. According to
tradition, he was

[]{#index_split_005.html#p270}**Pu'gu** 255

abducted as an infant from his cradle by a huge According to the
genealogy laid down by the talon or claw, with the implication that the
Memphis priests, Ptah upstaged Atum as the abduction was instigated by
an adversary from

"father of the gods." He generated not only the underworld, perhaps the
family of Gwawl, a Atum but the whole Heliopolis pantheon (see rejected
suitor of Rhiannon. Pryderi was found ENNEAD) by thinking and speaking
the cosmos in a stable and rescued by Teirnyon, who into existence. All
life and matter was gener-brought the child up as his son. Eventually
the ated by the heart and the tongue of Ptah. In true parents of Pryderi
were identified and he this cosmogony, NUN represents the amorphous was
returned to his family. His consort is Cigfa primeval matter out of
which Ptah generated and he succeeded Pwyll to the title 'Lord of
himself as a bisexual entity, the maleness of Dyfed.'

which is Ptah-Nun and the femaleness Ptah-Naunet. Ptah is occasionally
known by the title Khery-bakef, meaning "he who is under his **PTAH**

tree," suggesting that he was syncretized with a **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
Creator god and god of older local tree god at Memphis whose symbol
craftsmen.

is the *moringa* tree.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC, posIn addition to his role as
creator god, Ptah is sibly earlier, until the end of Egyptian history
also the patron deity of craftsmen and his pres-circa AD 400.
**SYNONYMS** Ptah-Nun; Ptah-ence is often denoted in art by dwarfish
crafts-Naunet; Khery-bakef.

men who work at various trades including **CENTER(S) OF CULT** chiefly
at Memphis, but with jewelry. Ptah is envisaged as molding mankind
sanctuaries throughout the Nile valley.

out of base materials. In Greco-Roman times he **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures, relief carvings, wall became identified with the Greek god
of paintings, papyrus illustrations.

smithies, HEPHAISTOS.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Pyramid Texts, etc.; the *Shabaka Stone.*

**Pu Ma**

Ptah is the patron deity of Memphis in Lower Generic name for deities.
Polynesian. The title Egypt at the southerly approach to the Nile given
to any god of high rank.

delta. With ATUM, the sun god of Heliopolis, he is the main rival
claimant to seniority as a creator god in the Egyptian pantheon. His
con-Pudicita

sort is the lion-goddess SAKHMET and, by impli-Goddess of chastity.
Roman. Depicted as a cation only, his son is NEFERTUM, the god of the
matronly lady, her cult fell from popularity as primeval lotus flower.
Ptah is depicted in human the Roman Empire veered increasingly toward
form wearing a closely fitting robe with only his decadence.

arms free. His most distinctive features are the invariable skull-cap
exposing only his face and ears, and the *was* or rod of dominion which
he **Pu'gu**

holds, consisting of a staff surmounted by the Sun god. Yukaghir
\[eastern Siberia\]. A spirit *ankh* symbol of life. He is otherwise
symbolized associated with justice and honorable living who by his
sacred animal, the bull.

punishes those who are evil or violent.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p271}256 **Pukkasi** **Pukkasi**

**Purvaphalguni**

Goddess of terrifying appearance. Buddhist Minor goddess of fortune.
Hindu (Epic and (Vajrayana) and Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a Puranic). A
moderately disposed *NAKSATRA;* group of *gauri.* Color: yellowish white
or blue.

daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

Attribute: waterjar.

**Purvasadha**

**Punarvasu**

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Minor goddess of fortune.
Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A moderately disposed *NAKSATRA;* Puranic). A
benevolent *NAKSATRA;* daughter of daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA
(SOMA).

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA). Concerned with restoring lost or stolen
property.

**Pusan**

*(nourisher)*

Sun god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). The origi-Punitavati

*(purified)*

nal Vedic list of six descendants of the goddess Local goddess. Hindu.
Worshiped at Karaikkal ADITI or ADITYAS, all of whom take the role of
sun near Ammaiyar. The deification of a Brahman gods, was, in later
times, enlarged to twelve, businessman's wife.

including Pusan. He is the charioteer of the sun and a guardian deity of
journeys and pathways.

Color: golden. Attributes: four lotuses.

**Puranai**

*(fullness)*

Mother goddess. Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern India\]. A NAVASAKTI and
one of the consorts of **Pusi**

Aiyanar.

Fish god. Polynesian \[Tikopia\]. The apotheosis of the reef eel who
probably accompanied the Tongan ancestors who migrated to Tikopia.

**Purandhi**

Minor goddess of prosperity. Hindu (Vedic). Associated with the
acquisition of wealth and some-Puspa

*(flower)*

times identified with Indra or other male deities.

Mother goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of the group of
ASTAMATARAS (mothers). Color: white. Attribute: a flower.

**Purusa**

Primeval creator god. Hindu (Vedic). Described as the primordial being
from whom the cosmos **Puspatara** *(flower-Tara)* was formed, possibly
the male component of the Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Color:
great mother, MATA. In later Hinduism regarded white. Attribute: a
forest garland.

as an *avatara* of VISŇU.

**Pustí**

*(growth)*

**Purvabhadrapada**

Fertility goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). In Minor goddess of
fortune. Hindu (Epic and northern India she is the second consort of
Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA;* daughter of VISŇU, but elsewhere may
also be linked with DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

SARASVATI and named as a consort of GANESA.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p272}**Pwyll** 257

**Pusya**

**Pwyll**

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Chthonic god. Celtic (Welsh).
The so-called Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA;* daughter of

"Lord of Dyfed" who, according to tradition, DAKSA and wife of CANDRA
(SOMA).

brought the pig to Wales having received it as a gift from ARAWN, the
underworld god. He earned the reward by substituting for Arawn and
fighting **Puta**

his enemy Hafgan, in payment for an unintended Goddess of agriculture.
Roman. Specifically slight to Arawn, whom he met one day while out
responsible for the proper pruning of trees and hunting. His consort is
RHIANNON and his son is shrubs.

PRYDERI.

[]{#index_split_005.html#p273}Q

6

**Qaitakalnin**

**Qeskina'qu**

*(big light)*

Guardian spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

Sky spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\]. One of The brother of Big
Raven, QUIKINNA'QU, and of the sons of QUIKINNA'QU, he is the apotheosis
of the mother spirit Ha'na (A'na).

daylight, a precious commodity during the long winter months.

**Qamai'ts**

Creator goddess. Bella Coola Indian \[British **Qos**

Columbia, Canada\]. Said to live in the upper heaven, Local weather god.
Pre-Islamic northern Ara-Atsa'axl, from where she controls the earth.
Accord-bian. Apparently known as the deification of an ing to tradition
the mountains were once malevolent outcrop of black basalt on the north
side of the beings who made the world uninhabitable, until she Wadi Hesa
\[near Kirbet Tannur\]. Also a god of conquered them and reduced them in
size. She is rainbows. Depicted seated on a throne flanked never invoked
or prayed to. Also Tsi Sisnaaxil (our by bulls. Attributes include a
branched thunder-woman); Ek Yakimtolsil (afraid of nothing).

bolt held in the left hand. A worshiper is seen offering him an eagle.

**Qa'wadiliquala**

Supreme god. Dza'wadeenox Indian \[British **Quadesˇ**

*(the holy one)*

Columbia, Canada\]. The guardian of the tribe but Fertility goddess.
Western Semitic, probably also a river deity responsible for bringing
the originating in Syria. She epitomizes female sex-salmon each year.
Said to live in the river Gwae. His uality and eroticism in the mold of
ASTARTE. She eldest son is TEWI'XILAK, the god of goat hunters.

was adopted by Egypt with the fertility gods His attributes include a
headband of red cedar bark.

MIN and RESĚP and became partly associated with the goddess HATHOR. She
is usually depicted nude standing on the back of a lion (see **Qaynan**

also INANA and NINHURSAG˜A) between Min to God of smithies. Pre-Islamic
southern Arabian.

whom she offers a lotus blossom, and Resěp for Known from inscriptions.

whom she bears snakes. Her cult followed the 258

[]{#index_split_005.html#p274}**Quiahuitl** 259

typically ancient Near Eastern pattern of a coatl and the black
Tezcatlipoca resulted in the sacred marriage carried out by her votary
priest-creation and destruction of four worlds or suns esses and their
priests or kings.

prior to the current sun. Conversely, Quetzalcoatl and Tezcatlipoca
together bore the responsibility for restoring the shattered universe
and **Quat**

initiating the fifth sun, Ollin. They are said to Creator god.
Polynesian \[Banks Islands\]. As with have passed through the body of
the earth mon-many Polynesian deities, the god is depicted as ster
TLALTECUHTLI and split it in two to form being very inactive, sitting
around all day doing heaven and earth.

nothing.

Later Quetzalcoatl descended to the underworld Mictlan to obtain from
its rulers the bones and ashes of generations of mankind to create the
**Qudsu**

humanity of the fifth sun. He is said to have Personification of
holiness. Western Semitic.

dropped the bones and broken them, thus Known from inscriptions at Tyre
where a human accounting for the differing statures of men.

figure stands naked on a lion, wearing a spiral First depicted as a
feathered serpent, he was headdress and holding lotus blossoms and
ser-known to the Nahua Indians as Quetzalcoatl who pents.

also revered him for his gift of science and arts.

Worshiped at Teotihuacan from circa AD 750 or earlier. Temples of
Quetzalcoatl include a six-QUETZALCOATL *(the feathered serpent)* tiered
step-pyramid at Teotihuacan, and the huge **ORIGIN** Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

manmade pyramid of Cholula on the Puebla **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa AD 750 to plain, the largest ancient structure in the New AD 1500
and probably much earlier.

World. The bearded Spanish conquistador **SYNONYMS** nine-wind; White
Tezcatlipoca; Cortez was believed by the emperor
Motecuh-TLAHUIZCALPANTECUHTLI.

zoma to be Quetzalcoatl.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Teotihuacan, Cholula, Represented iconographically
as a composite Xochicalco, Malinalco and others.

feathered hybrid, his aspect or *avatara* Tlahuiz-ART REFERENCES stone
sculptures, murals, calpantecuhtli was perceived as the Morning Star.

codex illustrations.

**NOTE:** Topiltzin Quetzalcoatl was also a his-LITERARY SOURCES
pre-Columbian codices.

torical figure born circa AD 935.

One of the four suns which are manifestations of the sun god
TEZCATLIPOCA. He presided over the **Quiahuitl**

`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_006.html}

****

second of the five world ages represented by the Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) sun EHECATL. The heroic creator god of the

\[Mexico\]. The sun deity representing the third of Aztecs, he is also
identified as the god of the wind.

the five world ages each of which lasted for 2,028

According to one of many traditions he fashioned heavenly years, each
heavenly year being fifty-mankind from his own blood and provided food
two terrestrial years. Assigned to the element fire by turning himself
into an ant so as to steal a grain and presided over by the rain god
TLALOC.

of maize which the ants had hidden inside a According to tradition, the
age ended in a cata-mountain. A titanic struggle between Quetzal-clysmic
destruction caused by a great fiery rain.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p275}260 **QUIKINN.A'QU**

The human population perished and in doing so swallowed the sun. His
daughter took it from were transformed into dogs, turkeys and butter-his
mouth and returned it to the sky.

flies. Illustrated by the "Stone of the Four Suns"

Little of this deity was known to the outside

\[Yale Peabody Museum\]. Also Quiauhtonatiuh; world until the turn of
the 20th century. In 1900

Tletonatiuh.

the Swedish-American ethnologist Waldemar Jochelson spent a considerable
time living with Siberian tribes, including the Kovyak in
**QUIKINN.A'QU**

*(big raven)*

the Kamchatka Peninsula, and discovered an **ORIGIN** Koryak \[Kamchatka
peninsula, south-extensive repertoire of tradition surrounding eastern
Siberia\]. Founder of the world.

Quikinn.a'qu.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** from early times until circa AD 1900.

**SYNONYMS** none.

**Quinoa-Mama**

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** no fixed sanctuaries.

Minor goddess of the quinoa crop. Pre-ART REFERENCES none specific,
though wooden Columbian Indian \[Peru\]. Models of the deity carvings
may relate.

were made from the leaves of the plant and kept **LITERARY SOURCES**
Jochelson *Memoirs of the* for a year before being burned in a ritual to
ensure *American Natural History Society* Vol. 10

a good quinine harvest.

(1905).

A spirit of a primitive culture still heavily influ-Quirinus

enced by animism. Quikinn.a'qu is not only a God of war. Roman. One of a
triad of warrior deity but also the first man and a powerful gods
including JUPITER and MARS. He originated *shaman*. Everything had
existed before, but he as the tutelary god of the Sabines, living on the
was responsible for revealing that which hitherto Quirinal, one of the
seven hills of Rome. His war-had been concealed. He is married to MITI
and rior status is primarily one of defense and he is said to have
twelve children, the most significant depicted bearded and in a
compromise of military of whom are EME'MQUT and Yina-a-naut (see also
and clerical clothing. The myrtle is sacred to him.

AESIR) who are in constant conflict with the evil spirits or Kalau.

Quikinn.a'qu is the subject of many heroic **Quzah**

*(archer)*

adventures in which he undertakes to make safe Mountain and weather god.
Pre-Islamic northern the activities of mankind. He possesses a raven
Arabian. Probably equating to QOSˇ and wor-cloak with which he can
indulge in shape-chang-shiped by the Idumaean tribe to the south of ing
and fly to the heavens. Acts as a celestial Judea as a storm god. Also
claimed to have been majordomo and an intercessor with the creator known
near Mecca. Attributes include a bow god. According to legend, he died
when he which shoots arrows of hail.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p276}R

6

**RADHA**

*(prosperity)*

Krsna takes as his consort RUKMINI and later **ORIGIN** Hindu (Epic and
Puranic) \[India\]. God-SATYABHAMA.

dess of emotional love.

Radha is sometimes considered to be an **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa
1000 BC and *avatara* of LAKSMI and thus a consort of Krsna, earlier
until present day.

and in southern India, as Bhumidevi, she **SYNONYMS** BHUMIDEVI
\[southern India\].

becomes associated with SARASVATI. She always **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none.

stands as the personification of emotional love in **ART REFERENCES**
virtually none.

stark contrast to SATI, the faithful and legitimate **LITERARY SOURCES**
later Puranic literature---the consort of Visňu's other *avatara,* RAMA.
In the works of Vidyapati (1352-1448), including the *bhakti* cult she
symbolizes the yearning of the *Brahma-vaivarta-purana.*

human soul to be drawn to Krsna. Attribute: a lotus.

Radha is a goddess whose role is limited to that of a favored mistress
of KRSNA. She only emerges fully as a goddess from the twelfth century
AD

**Rahu**

*(seizer)*

onward and she is one of the central figures in the Primordial cosmic
deity. Hindu. The son of poetry of Vidyapati, who places her as a cosmic
KASYAPA or RUDRA, according to legend he seizes queen. One of the
creation accounts describes the sun and moon to generate eclipses.

how Krsna divides himself into two parts, one of Rahu is depicted with
four hands and a tail, which is Radha. They make love for an age and or
as a head alone, his body having been their sweat and heavy breathing
become the destroyed by VISŇU. He stands upon a lion or in world's
oceans and winds. Radha gives birth to the a chariot drawn by eight
black horses. Color: golden egg of the universe, which floats on the
dark blue. Attributes: half moon, knife, sword primal waters for a year
until the god VISŇU

and trident.

emerges.

Other mythology accounts that Radha enjoys an illicit relationship with
an adolescent **Raijin**

Krsna. Their tryst is set in the village of Vraja Weather god(s). Shinto
\[Japan\]. A generic and in the surrounding forests at a time before
title for a large group of deities controlling thun-261

[]{#index_split_006.html#p277}262 **Rajamatangi** der, storms and rain.
Among the most is popularly known as the "Red Lord." His significant is
RYUJIN, the dragon god of thunder attributes include a hook, bow, red
lotus flower, and rain.

arrow and noose.

**Rajamatangi**

**Raluvimbha**

Goddess. Hindu. She stands upon a lotus. Attrib-Creator god. Baventa
\[northern Transvaal, utes: blue lotus, lute, moon and parrot.

South Africa\]. The tribal chief converses with the god, who is
responsible for all natural phenomena from thunderstorms to floods and
**Raka (1)**

plagues.

Minor goddess of prosperity. Hindu (Vedic.).

Associated with the acquisition of wealth.

**Rama** *(pleasing)*

Incarnation of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and **Raka**

*(trouble)* **(2)**

Puranic). The seventh *avatara* (sun aspect) of God of winds. Polynesian
\[Hervey Islands\]. The Visňu. Rama began as a comparatively minor fifth
child of VARI-MA-TE-TAKERE, the primor-incarnation who became one of the
great heroes of dial mother.

the *Ramayana* epic, as well as featuring in the His home is
Moana-Irakau (deep ocean). He *Mahabharata.* The son of Dasaratha and
Kausalya, received as a gift from his mother a great basket he was a
king of Ayodhya who, in the *Ramayana,* containing the winds, which
became his children, slew the demon Ravana that had captured his each
allotted a hole in the edge of the horizon consort SITA and was upheld
as a deity *par excel-through which to blow. The mother goddess also
*lence* in respect of manhood and honor, though his gave him knowledge
of many useful things which subsequent treatment of his wife might be he
passes on to mankind.*

regarded as cavalier (see Sita).

The *Ramayana* epic was composed by the poet and sage Valmeeki during
the reign of **Rakib-El**

Ramachandra and it gave form to a story that Moon god. Western Semitic
(Syrian). Known had been in existence for many centuries as an chiefly
from inscriptions circa eighth century BC.

oral tradition. Valmeeki portrayed Rama not as an incarnate deity but as
a great mortal hero.

The saga is strongly political and serves to unite **Rakta-Yamari**

*(red Yamari)*

a vast and fragmented people in a common God. Buddhist. An emanation of
AKSOBHYA and focus, irrespective of caste and language. It a variety of
YAMARI. Color: red.

defines the historical schism between the Hindu culture of India and the
largely Buddhist tradition of Sri Lanka.

**Raktalokesvara**

Rama rides in a chariot and is depicted in God. Buddhist. A variety of
the BODHISATTVA human form with two arms, typically holding a
AVALOKITESVARA. he is generally depicted sitting sugar cane bow and with
a quiver at his shoulder.

beneath an asoka tree with red blossoms and Also Ramacandra.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p278}**RATNASAMBHAVA** 263

**Ran**

**Ratnapani**

*(with a jewel in the hand)*

Storm goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). The consort God. Buddhist. A form of
RATNASAMBHAVA and of the god AEGIR. She was presumed to gather also a
*dhyanibodhisattva* or meditation *BUDDHA*.

mariners in her net having carried them to the Color: yellow or green.
Attributes: a jewel and bottom of the sea in whirlpools. She was
propiti-the moon disc.

ated with money and other offerings thrown overboard.

**Ratnaparamita**

Philosophical deity. Buddhist. Spiritual offspring **Rang**

of RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: red. Attributes: jew-God of hunting. Nuer
\[Sudan\]. The rays of the eled staff and moon on a lotus.

sun are his flaming spears. Also Garang.

**RATNASAMBHAVA**

*(born of a jewel)*

**Ranginui**

**ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. The third *DHYANIBUD-Sky god. Polynesian
(including Maori). The soDHA* or meditation *BUDDHA*.

called sky father of the Polynesian culture whose **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 500 BC until consort is PAPATUANUKU, the earth mother.

present.

During a prolonged period of inseparable inter-SYNONYMS Ratnaheruka.

course they became the prime parents of the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
pan-Asiatic.

Polynesian pantheon of gods. The children found **ART REFERENCES** metal
and stone sculptures; life between the bodies of the parents too
paintings.

cramped and conspired to force them apart.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Sadhanamala* and Tantric rit-Though one offspring,
TUMATAUENGA, wanted ual texts.

to slay them, the advice of TANEMAHUTA, the forest god, prevailed and
RANGINUI and Papatu-One of five mystic spiritual counterparts of a anuku
were merely forced apart.

human *buddha* in Vajrayana Buddhism. A product of the ADIBUDDHA who
represents the branch of the cosmos concerned with sensation.

**Rasnu**

He originates from the yellow mantra symbol God of passage and justice.
Persian \[Iran\]. The TRAM and lives in the southern paradise. The
guardian of the bridge which leads to the other-head of a group of
deities who carry jewels and world. He weighs souls in the scales at the
final are family symbols, his SAKTI is MAMAKI and he judgment.

is normally accompanied by two lions or horses.

Color: yellow. Attributes: jewel and three monkish robes.

**Rati**

Ratnasambhava is also taken as a tutelary deity Goddess of sexual
desire. Hindu (Epic and in Lamaism \[Tibet\] in which case his
attri-Puranic). A daughter of DAKSA (in some texts butes include a bell
and a jewel. Emanations SˇIVA) and the consort of the god KAMADEVA. One
include APARAJITA, JAMBHALA, MAHAPRATISARA, the of twelve SAKTIS
associated with the god VISŇU in PARAMITAS, PRASANNATARA, RATNAPANI,
VAJRATARA, his various incarnations. Attribute: a sword.

VAJRAYOGINI and VASUDHARA. ( *See also* AKSOBHYA,

[]{#index_split_006.html#p279}264 **Ratnolka** AMITABHA, AMOGHASIDDHI
and VAIROCANA.) **Rauni**

Color: yellow. Attributes: bell and jewel.

Storm goddess. Finno-Ugrian. Consort of the thunder god UKKO and
responsible for rainbows after storms.

**Ratnolka**

*(jewel meteor)*

Goddess of light and deification of literature.

Buddhist. One of a group of DHARANIS. Color: **Rbhus** *(skilful)*

yellow. Attribute: jeweled staff.

Sun gods. Hindu (Vedic). Identified in the *Rg* *Veda* as the craftsmen
of the gods and linked with the Maruts. They are led by INDRA.

**Ratnosnisa**

God. Buddhist. An USNISA deity apparently linked with the guardian sky
deities or *dikpalas* in the **RE**

southern direction. Color: blue.

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Creator god and sun god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC

until the end of Egyptian history, circa AD

**Ratri**

400\.

Goddess of the night. Hindu (Vedic). Ratri is the **SYNONYMS** Ra (Roman
and Greek); Re-Atum; personification of darkness bedecked with stars.

Re-Khepri; Amun-Re.

Her sister is USAS, the dawn goddess, who, with **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Heliopolis and elsewhere Agni the fire god, chases her away. She is
per-through the Nile valley.

ceived as the guardian of eternal law and order in **ART REFERENCES**
sculpture, stone reliefs, carv-the cosmos and of the waves of time.

ings, wall paintings, papyrus illustrations.

Ratri is generally regarded as a benign deity **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts, coffin texts, who offers rest and renewed vigor, and who
may etc; the *Westcar* Papyrus.

be invoked to ensure safety through the hours of darkness. She deposits
the gift of morning dew.

Re is one of several manifestations of the sun However she also offers a
bleaker aspect as one god and creator god of Egypt, emphasizing a who
brings gloom and barrenness.

fragmented tribal past in the pre-Dynastic period. According to legend
he created himself out of the mound that emerged from the **Raudna**

*(rowan tree)*

primeval ocean. In other depictions he arose as Goddess. Pre-Christian
Lappish. The consort of a child from the primeval lotus blossom. He is
the thunder god HORAGALLES.

generally depicted in the form of a falcon wearing the sun disc on its
head, surrounded by the serpentine form of the cobra-goddess WADJET.

**Raudri**

Re is also perceived as god of the underworld.

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One He is known in some
inscriptions as "Re in of a group of nine NAVASAKTIS who, in southern
OSIRIS, Osiris in Re," in which case he often India, rank higher than
the SAPTAMATARAS. She rides in his barque as a human figure with a ram's
may also equate with the terrifying aspect of head surmounted by a sun
disc and accompa-PARVATI as DURGA or KALI.

nied by the cobra goddess. The notion of the

[]{#index_split_006.html#p280}**Revanta** 265

"Eye of Re" is a very complex one, suggesting pharaoh and in the linen
bandages with which he several things including, in essence, his power
is swathed in death.

and perfection.

At Edfu Renenutet takes the title "lady of the The cult of Re took on
major importance at robes." In the Greco-Roman period, she became
Heliopolis from the middle of the third millen-adopted by the Greeks as
the goddess Her-nium when the V Dynasty rulers entitled them-mouthis and
was syncretized with ISIS.

selves as the sons of Re. Closely linked with the underworld god Osiris,
the notion took shape that the combined deity was Re by day as the sun
**Reret**

See TAWERET.

climbed above the eastern horizon and became Osiris, lord of the western
horizon, at the onset of night.

**Resěp (A)Mukal**

Re was regarded with a considerable amount of War and plague god.
Western Semitic (Canaan-fear. The cobra element suggests his ability to
ite and Phoenician), originating in Syria. Intro-deliver instant
nemesis. By contrast, he is said to duced into Egypt by the XVIII
Dynasty during have created mankind from his tears. Several the
sixteenth century BC and rapidly achieved minor deities were also, by
repute, generated out some prominence. His wife is Itum and he of drops
of blood falling from Re's penis which he was also known as Resěp-Amukal
and Resěp-self-mutilated (see SIA).

Sulman.

Resěp is probably modeled on the Mesopotamian NERGAL. He is depicted as
a youthful, **Redarator**

warlike god, often with a gazelle's head springing Minor god of
agriculture. Roman. Associated from his forehead, and with a spear in
his right with second ploughing and invoked by sacrifice, hand. In
Egyptian iconography he is depicted generally with TELLUS and CERES.

wearing the crown of Upper Egypt surmounted in front by the head of a
gazelle. He has links with the Theban war god MONTU and was
**Renenutet**

thought of as a guardian deity in battle by many Snake goddess.
Egyptian. Also possessing fertil-Egyptian pharaohs; he is said to have
shot fire-ity connotations, she guarded the pharaoh in the brands with a
bow and arrow. He also exerted a form of a cobra. There is some evidence
that benign influence against disease. The influence of she enjoyed a
cult in the Faiyum, the highly fer-Resěp extended to Cyprus during the
pre-tile region of the Nile valley. She is depicted Hellenic period and
at the time of Hellenization either in human form or as a hooded cobra,
in he was allied to and perhaps syncretized with which case she bears
close association with the APOLLO. Also Rasˇap, Resěf.

goddess WADJET who is embodied in the *uraeus*.

Her gaze has the power to conquer enemies. In her capacity as a
fertility goddess she suckles **Revanta**

*(with wealth)*

infant rulers and provides good crops and har-God of hunters. Hindu. The
son of SURYA and vests, linked in this capacity to OSIRIS and the
SANJNA. Known mainly from eastern India and more ancient grain god
NEPER. She is also a Gujarat, he protects mankind against the dangers
magical power residing in the linen robe of the of the forest.
Infrequently depicted in art.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p281}266 **Revati**

**Revati**

**Riddhivasita**

*(control of prosperity)*

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Minor goddess. Buddhist. One
of a group of Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA*; daughter of VASITAS
personifying the disciplines of spiritual DAKSA and wife of CANDRA
(SOMA).

regeneration. Color: green. Attribute: moon disc.

**Rhadamanthos**

**Rigisamus**

Minor chthonic underworld god. Greco-Roman.

God of war. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Assimilated One of three judges
attending the goddess of with MARS.

justice THEMIS evaluating the souls of the dead entering Hades.

**Rind**

Chthonic goddess. Northern Germanic and **Rhea**

Nordic (Icelandic). She is mentioned as a consort Primordial goddess.
Greek. The daughter of of OTHIN and mother of VALI. Also Rinda; Rindr.

OURANOS and GAIA, she is the consort of KRONOS and mother of ZEUS and
other gods of **Ritona**

Olympus, known only from the *Theogony* Goddess of river fords.
Romano-Celtic. Known (Hesiod) and *Iliad* (Homer). She is also
recog-from inscriptions and associated with the Treveri nized in Roman
literature under the same name.

tribe.

Also Rheie.

**Rohini** *(red)*

**Rheie**

See RHEA.

1\. Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A benevolent
*NAKSATRA;* daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA). She is the
**Rhiannon**

mother of BUDHA.

Chthonic horse goddess. Celtic (Irish). The 2. Goddess of learning.
Jain. One of sixteen daughter of Hefaidd Hen and consort of PWYLL,
VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

she rides upon a white mare and is associated with the underworld and
with fertility. May be virtually synonymous with the Romano-Celtic
**Roma**

goddess Rigantona whose name means "great Tutelary goddess. Greek and
Roman. The deity queen." Authors suggest she is modeled on the was
actually conceived by the Greeks and shrines goddess MODRON and she
partly equates with were set up at centers including Smyrna and EPONA.

Ephesus.

**Riddhi**

*(prosperity)*

**Rongomai**

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of the Whale god. Polynesian and
Maori. He is the consorts of GANESA, but otherwise very close in son of
TANGAROA, the creator deity responsible appearance to LAKSMI. She
carries Laksmi's for the oceans and the fish, and the father of
attributes when standing alone.

KAHUKURA, the deity responsible for the appear-

[]{#index_split_006.html#p282}**Rudra** 267

ance of the rainbow. He is also regarded as the deity Rsabhanatha and
therefore may represent ancestor of several Maori clans.

an attempt to meld the two religions by absorb-Various traditions are
associated with Rongo-ing Jainism locally.

mai. In some regions of New Zealand he is also regarded as a god of war
and is thought to have discovered the magic arts during a visit to the
**Ruamoko**

underworld, including the power of *kaiwhatu*, a God of volcanoes and
earthquakes. Polynesian preventative charm against witchcraft. Rongomai
and Maori. According to tradition, Ruamoko is is sometimes mistakenly
identified with RONGO-the youngest son of RANGINUI and PAPATUANUKU

MATANE, or Rongo, though the latter is generally and is possessed by a
formidable temper. When considered a distinct personality. As the god
his older siblings set about separating the prime responsible for the
well-being of whales Rongo-parents from their eternal lovemaking in
order to mai may take the form of a whale, a guise in which allow light
into the space between sky and earth, he once challenged MARU, a more
widely recog-he was enraged and his boisterous tantrum nized New Zealand
war god. Separate mythology became revealed in the violence of volcanic
erup-places him in the heavens in the form of a comet.

tions and earthquakes.

Ruamoko is of less importance than PELE, the chief volcano goddess of
Polynesia, who is **Rongomatane**

revered mainly in Hawaii.

God of agriculture. Polynesian (including Maori).

He is the father of cultivated food and the special gardener of the
*kumara* or sweet potato which is **Rubanga**

a vital crop in Polynesia. In New Zealand the first Creator god. Alur
\[Uganda and Democratic sweet potatoes are offered to Rongomatane. In
Republic of Congo, Africa\]. His sacred bird is the traditions of the
Hervey Islands, Rongo is one the ibis.

of the five sons of the moon god, Vatea, and the mother goddess, Papa.

**Ruda**

Tutelary god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian. An **Rosmerta**

*(great provider)*

androgynous being symbolized by the evening Fertility goddess.
Romano-Celtic (Gallic and star. Also ARSU (Palmyra).

British). Consort to the god Mercury. Probably locally worshiped and
often depicted carrying a basket of fruit, purse or cornucopia. She and
Mer-Rudiobus

cury frequently appear together. In addition to Probably a horse god.
Romano-Celtic (Gallic).

her purse, she may bear a twin-headed ax or, Known from an inscription
at Neuvy-en-Sullias alternatively, she may carry Mercury's *caduceus*
which includes a depiction of a stallion.

(snake-entwined wand).

*See also* MERCURIUS.

**Rudra** *(howler)*

Weather god. Hindu (Vedic). An early deity, **Rsabha**

*(the bull)*

largely superseded by SˇIVA, who controls the gales God. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). An unusual and storms. Often linked with the fire god AGNI
*avatara* of VISŇU. Said to be similar to the Jain and the rain god
INDRA. Generally a malignant

[]{#index_split_006.html#p283}268 **Rudracandra** god, Rudra lives in
the mountains and is deemed to and typically stands to his right. Her
son is KAMA.

be either tall or dwarf, depending on the severity of She is also an
*avatara* of LAKSMI. Attribute: a the storm. He brings death and disease
to man and lotus. Also Rukmabayi.

domestic animals through his "thousand shafts,"

and is considered to be highly unpredictable.

**Rumina**

Minor goddess. Roman. Associated with breast-Rudracandra

feeding.

Distinct form of the goddess DURGA. Hindu. One of a group of nine
NAVADURGAS *,* known as the

"nine durgas."

**Rundas**

God of fortune. Hittite and Hurrian. Also associated with hunting, he is
symbolized by a double **Rudracarcika**

eagle carrying prey in its talons.

Mother goddess. Hindu (Puranic). One of the ASTAMATARAS, alternatively a
variety of the goddess DURGA.

**Rupini**

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An attendant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

**Rudrani**

Goddess. Hindu. An epithet of DURGA, impersonated by a young
pre-menstrual girl in the **Ryangombe**

Durga festivals.

Tutelary god. Rwanda \[East Africa\]. An ancestral deity and king of the
spirit world who has an oracular capacity.

**Rugievit**

Local tutelary and war god. Slav. Identified by the historian Saxo
Grammaticus as inhabiting the **Ryujin**

island of Rügen, depicted with seven heads and Dragon god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. A deity control-carrying a sword.

ling thunder and rain and probably the most significant of the group of
weather gods known as the RAIJIN. He is of Chinese origin **Ruhanga**

and more Buddhist than Shinto. He does not Creator god. Bunyoro
\[Uganda, East Africa\]. The appear in the sacred Shinto texts *Kojiki*
or initiator of the world, he is regarded as a distant *Nihongi,* but
enjoys shrines in many Shinto figure and seldom invoked.

sanctuaries and is worshiped by farmers, particularly in times of
drought. He lives in the sea, lakes and large ponds from which he
**Rukmini**

*(with gold ornaments)*

ascends in mists and winds. He generates dark Goddess. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). The daugh-rain clouds which then burst. His main festival ter
of Bhismaka, she is the first consort of KRSNA takes place in June.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p284}S

6

**Sa**

and backed the primordial female force SOPHIA Chthonic creator god. Kono
\[eastern Guinea, who, having been responsible for Yaldabaoth, was West
Africa\]. One of a pair of creator deities, with horrified at what she
had created. She describes ALATANGANA. Sa inhabited the primeval swamps
Yaldabaoth as "a blind god, SAMAEL." Sabaoth is before the sky or the
light existed and before there joined by seven benign archangels and in
the first were any living things on earth. He had a daugh-great battle
of the cosmos comes to rule over all, ter who eloped with Alatangana and
bore fourteen including the forces of chaos. Arguably Sabaoth children,
three pairs of black and four pairs of equates to the god of Israel,
YHWH.

white, all of whom spoke different languages and to whom Sa gave the
tools of survival.

**Sabazios**

God. Phrygian \[northwestern Turkey\]. Eventually **SABAOTH**

Hellenized, identified with ZEUS and DIONYSOS

**ORIGIN** Gnostic

Christian

\[eastern

and linked with Dionysiac mysteries, appearing Mediterranean\]. Creator
god.

in Athens from circa 400 BC. His device is a right **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** uncertain origins hand cast in bronze and decorated with
symbols until circa AD 400.

representing his benevolence. His influence **SYNONYMS** none, but see
below.

extended into Roman culture where he reached a **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
undefined cells within the height of popularity circa AD 200. As late as
AD 300

area of early Christian influence.

there are frescoes of Sabazios in the tomb of Vibia **ART REFERENCES**
none.

whose husband was a priest of the god's cult.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Nag Hammadi* codices.

Sabaoth, in Gnostic cosmogony, is one of the **Sadaksari (Lokesvara)**

seven offspring of the "primal parent" YALD-Variety of AVALOKITESVARA.
Buddhist-Lamaist ABAOTH. The narrative which emerges in such

\[Tibet\]. The form of Avalokitesvara that is incar-works as *Origin of
the World* is confused and in nate in the succession of Dalai Lamas.
Color: places contradictory. Sabaoth rebelled against his white.
Attributes: book, conch, jewel, lotus and father, who had become
arrogant and impious, rosary.

269

[]{#index_split_006.html#p285}270 **Sadbhuja-Sitatara**
**Sadbhuja-Sitatara**

**Sajara**

God. Buddhist. An emanation of AMOGHASIDDHI Rainbow god. Songhai
\[eastern Mali, West and a variety of SITATARA. Color: white.
Attributes: Africa\]. Perceived as a rainbow-colored snake and arrow,
blue lotus, bow, image of Amoghasiddhi on symbolized by a tree where
white rams are sacri-crown, lotus and rosary. Three-headed.

ficed and hung. The animals' blood is sprinkled on the tree. The ritual
is accompanied by a rain dance.

**Sadhumati**

*(good)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of several deified BHUMIS
recognized as different spir-SAKHMET

*(the powerful one)*

itual spheres through which a disciple passes.

**ORIGIN** Egyptian. Goddess of war.

Color: white. Attributes: staff, and sword on a **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC until blue lotus.

the end of Egyptian history circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** Sachmet; possibly SĚSMETET.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Heliopolis, Memphis and **Sadrapa**

other sanctuaries along the Nile valley.

God of healing. Western Semitic (Syrian) and **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures, particularly at Kar-Pontic. He is depicted on reliefs as a
youth hold-nak from sixteenth century BC onward; wall ing a scorpion or
snake. Known originally from paintings, royal tombs at Thebes, etc.

Palmyra, his popularity spread to Carthage and, **LITERARY SOURCES**
coffin texts, royal tombs at during the Hellenic period, to the Greek
coast.

Thebes, etc.

Also Satrapis (Greek).

Sakhmet is a significant deity in the Egyptian New Kingdom at Memphis.
Her father is the **Sagaramati**

*(mind of the ocean)*

sun god RE and she is the consort of PTAH. She God. Buddhist. A
BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-

is, by implication, the mother of the god of designate. Color: white.
Attributes: conch, and the primordial lotus blossom, NEFERTUM. In sword
with staff.

iconography Sakhmet is generally depicted in human form, but with the
head of a lioness surmounted by a sun disc. Occasionally she is
**Sahar**

drawn with a rosette pattern over each breast Moon god. Western Semitic
(Aramaic). Known (see ISŤAR).

from inscriptions.

Sakhmet is, to an extent, syncretized with the goddess MUT, who is the
consort of the sun god of Thebes, AMUN. In the Karnak complex large
**Sai' Al Qaum**

*(the good and beautiful god* numbers of Sakhmet's statues, typically
hewn in *who does not drink wine)*

black granite and in which she holds the *ankh* Local guardian deity.
Western Semitic (Nabataean).

symbol of life or a papyrus stem, were raised in Known from two
inscriptions at Palmyra which the precinct of the Mut sanctuary.

suggest him to be a protector of caravans. Attributes She is said to
breathe fire against the enemies of include a helmet. He may have
developed from an the pharaoh and, like HATHOR in her attempt to
Egyptian god Sai (Greek: Psais).

destroy the human race, she can be the vengeful

[]{#index_split_006.html#p286}**Salus** 271

"eye of Re." She is sometimes linked with Hathor **Sˇala**

who is described as the "mistress of the house of War goddess.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akka-Sakhmet." In a more benign aspect, Sakhmet
is a dian). A consort of ADAD, she carries a double-guardian goddess
against disease.

headed mace-scimitar embellished with lion heads.

**Sˇakka(n)**

**Salagrama**

God of cattle. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Aniconic form of the god VISŇU.
Hindu (late). A Akkadian). A patron god of herdsmen, probably fossil
ammonite shell embodying the god and deriving from the Sumerian god
LAHAR. Also forming a part of daily ritual in many Vaisnava Amakandu,
Sumuqan.

households as well as appearing in monasteries.

**Sakra**

*(the mighty one)*

**Salevao**

God. Buddhist. The god of the month *asvina* and Primordial god of
rocks. Polynesian. He is the an epithet of the Vedic god INDRA.

brother of SAVEA SI'ULEO, god of the dead, and the consort of
PAPATUANUKA, the earth mother, who became pregnant and gave birth to Moa
in **Sakti**

*(energy)*

the center of the earth. (Moa may have been the Personification of a
god. Hindu, Jain and Bud-ancestor of mankind, roughly equating to Adam.)
dhist. The effective power, or creative force, of a deity in the form of
a female aspect. In a more specific context, the SAKTI identifies the
**Sˇalim**

`</i>`{=html}

*creative force of the god SˇIVA, particularly the God of evening.
Western Semitic (Syrian). Gen-ugra* or violent aspects DURGA and KALI.
The erally linked with SˇAR, the god of dawn.

Sakti may frequently have the same characteristics and carry the same
attributes as the principal god. In Tantrism, the unity of **Salm of
Mahram** *(image of Mahram)* opposites is defined by the Sakti *,* which
is the Local tutelary god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

*yoni* or female sexuality that unites with the Correspondence of the
Babylonian king Nabonidus male *lingam* of Sˇiva.

(559-539 BC) mentions that this deity was worshiped at Taima, an
important trade and religious center where he was head of the pantheon.
Gods in **Sakumo**

the region were often named after local places and God of war. Gan
\[Accra region, Ghana, West personified by a stone stele carved with
schematic Africa\]. The guardian deity of the Gan tribe.

anthropomorphic features and a winged disc showing strong Egyptian
influence. Also Salman.

**Sakyamuni**

*(the sage of the Sakyas)*

God. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. The historical **Salus**

*(salvation)*

BUDDHA *,* known mainly from Tibet. He stands Minor god of health.
Roman. A sanctuary dated upon a lotus. Color: golden. Attribute: a bowl.

to 302 BC on the Quirinal, one of the seven hills

[]{#index_split_006.html#p287}272 **Sama**

of Rome, is dedicated to the deity. He was also the god UTU in the
Sumerian pantheon. He is worshiped within the colonies of the empire.

associated with justice. His symbol is the sun disc There is an altar at
Corbridge in Northumber-and a star surrounded with radiating sunbeams.

land, England with a votive inscription to Salus.

He may carry a single-headed scimitar embel-Attributes include a bowl
and a snake.

lished with a panther head. His sanctuary is known as the *E-babbar.*
Also associated with human-headed bulls. His attendant deities **Sama**

include Mesˇaru, justice, and Kettu, righteousness.

Obscure heroic god. Dravidian (Tamil) \[south-He came to much greater
prominence in the ern India\]. Known circa first to fifth century AD.

pantheon at Babylon from about the eighteenth The younger brother of the
god of love KAMA century BC.

and equating to SAMBA, worshiped in northern India.

**Samba**

Heroic god. Hindu \[northern India\]. The son of **Samael**

KRSNA and RUKMINI, alternatively the son of Creator god. Gnostic
Christian. The "blind god."

VISŇU. The younger brother of the god KAMA *See also* YALDABAOTH.

and consort of INDUKARI. Also one of the minor incarnations of Visňu
worshiped in the cult of the *pancaviras* by the Vrisni clans.

**Samantabhadra** *(all-good)* God. Buddhist. A form of VAIROCANA and a
*dhyanibodhisattva* (spiritual meditation *buddha*) *.*

**Samkarsana**

He sits on a throne carried by a white elephant.

Localized form of BALARAMA. Dravidian (Tamil) Color: blue, green or
white. Attributes: bell, cup,

\[southern India and Sri Lanka\]. Has a complexion jewel, lotus with
prayer wheel or sword. In Tibet

"white like milk," wears a blue robe with a red he is also known as
Kun-tu-bzan-po.

garland and carries a *nanjil* (plough).

*See also* BO HSIAN.

**Sampsa**

*(sedge)*

**Samantaprabha** *(possessing universal splendor)* Vegetation god.
Pre-Christian Finnish. He is per-Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana).
One of ceived as a giver of life to seed which lies dormant several
deified BHUMIS recognized as different through the winter months. His
unnamed con-spiritual spheres through which a disciple passes.

sort, to whom he is wed in a form of sacred Color: red. Attributes: an
image of AMITABHA marriage which takes place at sowing time, is also
carried in the hand, and a staff.

his stepmother.

**Sˇamasˇ**

**Sˇams**

Sun god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian).

Sun deity. Pre-Islamic Arabian. In the north the The patron deity of
Sippar and Larsa. His consort being is male, in the south female.
Probably is the mother goddess A-A. Sˇamasďerives from derived from
SˇAMASˇ.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p288}**Saning Sari** 273

**Samvara**

*(keeping out)*

Color: blue. Attributes: bell, jewel, lotus, prayer God. Buddhist
(Mahayana). One of the emana-wheel, regal trappings, staff and sword.
Three-tions of AKSOBHYA and also of HEVAJIRA. In eyed and three-headed.

Lamaism he is a four-headed tutelary *yi-dam* god.

His SAKTI *is* VAJRAVARAHI. He stands upon one or more four-armed Hindu
deities including Kalara-Sangarios

tri and BHAIRAVA. Color: blue or black. Attrib-River god. Phrygian
\[northwestern Turkey\]. A utes: ax, bell, cup, drum, image of Aksobhya
on Hellenized version of an Asiatic god whose the crown, image of
four-faced BRAHMA, knife, daughter, NANA, is, according to some
traditions, moon disc, skin, staff and trident.

the mother of the vegetation god ATTIS. She impregnated herself with an
almond seed.

**San Chou Niang Niang**

Mother goddess. Chinese. First deified during **Sango**

the Sung Dynasty (AD 960-1279) to combat the God of thunder. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\].

popularity of KUAN YIN, no mortal existence is His sacred animal is the
ram whose bellowing is recognized for this deity who is referred to
likened to the noise of thunder. Attributes include simply as "heavenly
mother." By tradition she an ax which is worn on the head and bears six
eyes.

rules over the "islands of the blessed," the three mythical islands
which are the home of the gods.

She is depicted wearing a yellow robe signifying **Sani**

imperial rank and carries the attribute of a 1. Astral god. Hindu. The
son of SURYA and scepter. Typically she displays an enigmatic smile.

CHAYA and the personification of the planet Saturn. Stands upon a lotus
or rides in an iron chariot drawn by eight piebald horses. Color: **gSan
Sgrub**

black or blue. Attributes: arrow, bow, rosary, staff God. Bon and
Lamaist \[Tibet\]. Originally a Bon and trident.

deity who became syncretized as a variety of the 2. Astral god.
Buddhist. Stands upon a tortoise.

god YAMA in Lamaism. His animal is the bull and Color: blue-black.
Attribute: a staff.

he may appear bull-headed. Color: red. Attributes: cup, knife and prayer
wheel.

**Saning Sari**

Rice mother. Javan. Represented by parts of the **Sandhya**

rice plant known as *indoea padi* (mother of the Goddess. Hindu (Epic
and Puranic). The daugh-rice). At planting, the finest grain is picked
out ter of BRAHMA and consort of SˇIVA or other deities.

and sown in the nursery bed in the form of the goddess, after which the
rest of the grain is sown round about. At transplanting, the shoots
making **San-Dui**

up the rice mother are given a similar special Tutelary god.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a place in the paddy field. At
harvesting, the rice group of Lamaist tutelary or *yi-dam* deities
cho-mother plants are "found" and brought home for sen on an individual
basis as personal guardians.

the following year's planting.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p289}274 **Sanjna**

**Sanjna**

*(conscience)*

**Santa**

*(appeased)*

Goddess. Hindu. The daughter of TVASTAR, a Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic
and Puranic). A consort of SURYA and, in some texts, the mother SAKTI
who is one of a group of both SAPTAMATARA of YAMA.

and ASTAMATARA mothers. Also CAMUNDA.

**Sanju**

**Santana**

*(offspring)*

Harvest goddess. Kafir \[Afghanistan\]. A little-Minor god. Hindu. The
son of Ugra and DIKSA.

reported deity, the consort of the war god GISH

Also the personification of one of the five trees of and daughter of
SANU. She controls the har-paradise.

vesting, threshing and winnowing of grain and the safe storage of wheat
and butter. She carries a golden winnow and is either depicted in
**Santi**

*(peace of mind)*

human form or as a goat. Her cult is known Goddess. Hindu. The consort
of TRIVIKRAMA.

chiefly from the village of Pronz in the southern Hindukush where she
enjoyed an important sanctuary with stone seats around the icon, part
**Santoshí Mata**

of which reportedly still exists. Wooden statues Mother goddess. Modern
Hindu. She first depict her in human form, nude to the waist.

appeared in northern India in 1960 and has since Alternatively, she is
perceived as a bird that acts developed a sizeable cult following. She
is as a messenger. The blood of sacrificial animals invoked to assist in
gaining personal advancement was poured over the figure. Also Sulmech;
and prosperity.

SANU.

**Sanu**

**Sankari**

God of obscure affinities. Kafir (Afghanistan).

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One The father of the goddess
SANJU and an adversary of the SAPTAMATARAS.

of the war god GISH. Described as a "Muslim," so perhaps of foreign
import. Also Sanru.

**Sankha(pala)**

Snake god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of **Sao Ching Niang Niang**

a group of seven MAHANAGAS or *nagadevas.*

Mother goddess. Chinese. One of the "nine dark Attributes: cup and
rosary. Three-eyed.

ladies" of the pantheon who adopt a protective role. She removes rain
clouds when they threaten to flood crops.

**Sanmukha**

*(six-headed)*

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A form of SKANDA and the son of PASUPATI
and Svaha. God **Sˇapasˇ**

of the month *asadha.* His SAKTIS include VIJAYA Sun god. Western
Semitic (Canaanite). Modeled and Jaya. He holds a large variety of
attributes.

on the Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian) Also Arumukan.

god SˇAMASˇ.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p290}**SARASVATI** 275

**Saptamatara**

YAMA and YAMI, the twin progenitors of the Generic title of a group of
mother goddesses.

human race. Little else is known of her, but she is Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). Seven deities of evil accounted as having an impetuous nature.

influence, who generally inflict disease or other *See also* VIVASVAN.

harm on children. Common color: red. Attributes: cup and lotus.

**Sarapis**

God. Late Egyptian. Known only from the **Sˇar**

Greco-Roman period of the early Ptolemies God of the dawn. Western
Semitic (Syrian).

(fourth century BC) but persisting in Europe until Generally linked with
the god of evening, SˇALIM.

second or third century AD. In Egyptian religion Sarapis is a
hybridization of certain aspects of OSIRIS, the underworld god, and
APIS, the bull **Sˇara**

god, who symbolizes the earthly presence of Minor war god. Mesopotamian
(Sumerian and PTAH. Sarapis is perceived to epitomize both the
Babylonian-Akkadian). Mainly identified with the fertility of the land
and the life of the sacred bull city of Umma, north east of Unug (Uruk),
and after death. In Greek mythology he takes on identified in some texts
as the son of INANA (ISŤAR).

aspects of ZEUS, HELIOS, ASKLEPIOS and DIONYSOS. He was worshiped
extensively in the Roman Empire period. A sanctuary at York in
**Saraddevi**

*(goddess of autumn)*

England was dedicated by a soldier of the sixth Fertility and vegetation
goddess. Buddhist-legion, and magnificent statues were discovered
Lamaist \[Tibet\]. Associated with autumn, and in the Walbrook Mithraeum
in London, and at an attendant of the goddess SRIDEVI. Her sacred Merida
in Spain. Also Seraphis (Greek).

animal is an antelope. Attributes: cup, knife and peacock feather.

**SARASVATI** *(flowing water)* **ORIGIN** Hindu (Vedic, Epic, and
Puranic) \[India\].

**Sarama**

*(the nimble one)*

Mother goddess and goddess of wisdom. Later, Attendant goddess. Hindu
(Vedic, Epic and patron of the arts.

Puranic). She acts as a messenger to the god **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 600 BC, but INDRA and guards his herds. In later Hindu texts
undoubtedly based on much earlier prehistoric Sarama is reputedly the
mother of all dogs and is models, until present.

given the epithet the "bitch of heaven." The *Rg* **SYNONYMS** Brahmi;
Vagdevi (goddess of speech).

*Veda* accounts her as having punished the minor Other epithets include
BHARATI.

deity Panis for stealing cows.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout India.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures generally in bronze, but also in stone.
Reliefs.

**Saranyu**

*(the fleet one)*

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Rg Veda* and other Vedic Primordial goddess of
uncertain affinities. Hindu texts; *Ramayana* epic and Puranic texts.

(Vedic). Saranyu is the daughter of the god TVASTAR, and the sister of
VISVARUPA. Her consort is Sarasvati, as an identifiable personality, may
have Vivasvat, by whom she is said to be the mother of begun as a Vedic
river goddess (the actual river

[]{#index_split_006.html#p291}276 **Sarpanitu(m)** Sarasvati has now
disappeared but she may also be deity of the city of Sˇu-Sin. By
Hellenistic times linked with the Indus, etc). In the Vedic capacity she
probably became the more important god-her waves are said to smash
mountains and her dess Sarrahitu who is included in the pantheon at
voice is the roar of the torrent. Since her source Uruk and mentioned in
various cult texts where of strength is the primeval water, she is
inex-she is described as "the bride" and was presum-haustible and she is
a bringer of fertility and ably involved in a sacred marriage ceremony.

bountiful harvests. Thus, by inference, she also provides prosperity.
Her presence purifies and, in antiquity, she slew VRTRA, the demonic god
of **Sˇarrahitu**

See SˇARRA ITU.

chaos. In her capacity as a Vedic goddess she is invoked on the
sacrificial field with the lesser goddesses ILA, BHARATI, MAHI and
HOTRA.

**Sarritor**

In later Puranic literature Sarasvati (Brahmi) Minor god of agriculture.
Roman. Invoked dur-becomes the first consort of the creator god ing
growing and harvesting of crops.

BRAHMA (see also GAYATRI). Other texts offer her in contention with
LAKSMI as consort of VISŇU.

She also became syncretized with the goddess **Sˇarruma**

VAC. She is said to have invented Sanskrit and is God. Hittite and
Hurrian. Originally a Hurrian identified as goddess of wisdom and of the
arts.

deity adopted by the Hittite state religion. The son The Vedas are her
inspiration and she may be of the weather god TESˇUB and his consort
HEBAT.

known as the "mother of the Vedas." A Hindu fes-His sacred animal is a
panther. Attribute: ax.

tival in her honor is celebrated in early January or late February. She
is a patron goddess of students, and books, pencils and pens are offered
to her by **Sarvabuddhadharma-Kosavati**

*(with the*

children before they begin classes. Her image *virtues of all the
buddhas)* often appears on the portals of school gates.

God of literature. Buddhist. The deification of She is generally
depicted with either two or texts. One of a group of DHARANIS *.* Color:
yellow.

four arms. Color: white. She may be seated or Attributes: basket of
jewels and staff.

ride upon a swan or a peacock or a lotus. Attributes include
particularly the lute but also arrow, bell, book, bow, conch, club,
hook, prayer wheel, **Sarvakarmavaranavisodhani**

*(washing*

rosary, waterjar and other items. She may offer a *away the obstruction
of all deeds)* piece of sugar cane or a flower to Brahma. Infre-God of
literature. Buddhist. The deification of quently three-headed.

texts. One of a group of DHARANIS *.* Color: green.

Attribute: staff.

**Sarpanitu(m)**

See ZARPANITUM.

**Sarvanivaranaviskambhin** *(remover of stain)* God. Buddhist
(Mahayana). A *dhyaniboddhisattva* **Sˇarra Itu**

or spiritual meditation *buddha.* Color: white.

Fertility goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian and Attributes: book, jewel,
moon disc, sword and Babylonian-Akkadian). Originally the tutelary
staff.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p292}**Satis** 277

**Sarvapayanjaha** *(remover of miseries)* **SATI**

*(truth)*

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A *dhyaniboddhisattva* **ORIGIN** Hindu (Epic
and Puranic) \[India\].

or spiritual mediation *buddha.* Color: white.

Mother goddess.

Attribute: hook in two hands.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 400 until present.

**SYNONYMS** Sakti, PARVATI

**Sarvasokatamonirghatamati**

*(destroyer of*

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specific.

*sorrow)*

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures generally in bronze, God. Buddhist. A
*dhyanibodhisattva* or spiritual but also in stone.

meditation *buddha.*

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Ramayana* and other texts.

Sati is the older incarnation of the benign **Sarvastramahajvala**

*(the great blaze of all*

aspect of the goddess Sakti. Alternatively she is *weapons)*

perceived as an incarnation of LAKSMI. Accord-Goddess of learning. Jain
\[India\]. One of sixteen ing to legend her father was DAKSA and her
VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

mother PRASUTI. She bore sixteen daughters, the youngest of whom was
Sati. She is perceived as an ideal Hindu wife and mother who, as a
**Sasanadevata**

maiden, falls in love with the god SˇIVA. At her Messenger goddess. Jain
\[India\]. Generic name choosing-of-a-husband ceremony she is dis-for
one of a group of twenty-four who minister to tressed that her father
has not invited Sˇiva and the *tirthankaras* or saints of Jainism.

throws her bridal wreath into the air, whereupon Sˇiva appears in front
of her. She becomes the consort of Sˇiva, but the marital association is
**Sasuratum**

generally recognized when he is in his form Midwife goddesses. Western
Semitic (Canaanite).

known as Bhava, an epithet meaning "existence."

A group of seven female deities fathered by BAAL.

Eventually she dies at Daksa's feet from the self-Also Kosharot
(Hebrew).

immolating heat of her own purity and zeal. She is reincarnated as
Parvati.

The mythology is the basis of the practice of **Satabhisa**

self-sacrifice which came to be known as *sati* or Minor goddess of
fortune. Hindu (Epic and *suttee*. She is also connected with
fire-walking Puranic). A malevolent NAKSATRA; daughter of rituals.

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Satis**

*(she who shoots; she who pours)* **Satarupa**

*(with a hundred forms)*

Minor goddess. Egyptian. A guardian of the Minor goddess. Hindu
(Puranic). The daughter southern (Nubian) border of Upper Egypt. The of
BRAHMA with whom he committed incest consort of the ram god KHNUM and,
by implica-and whose beauty caused him to generate tion, the mother of
ANUKIS. She is depicted wear-four heads so that he might view her from
all ing the conical white crown of Upper Egypt, directions.

bearing tall plumes or antelope horns. Satis is

[]{#index_split_006.html#p293}278 **Satrughna** described in Pyramid
Texts, particularly the Step **Saubhagya-Bhuvanesvari** *(buddha of
good* Pyramid at Saqqara, and there is reference to a *fortune)*

sanctuary built for her at Elephantine. Also Satjit; Goddess of good
fortune. Buddhist. A gentle and Satet (both Egyptian).

benevolent deity. Color: red. Attributes: red lotus, and waterjar with
jewels.

**Satrughna**

*(destroyer of foes)*

Minor god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The **Saule**

brother of LAKSMANA and a half-brother to the Sun goddess. Pre-Christian
Latvian. Also having god RAMA. His mother is Sumitra. He may be
agricultural links, she is perceived as living on a depicted holding a
fly whisk in each hand.

heavenly farm atop a mythical mountain and *See also* LAKSMANA.

invoked to induce fertility and ripening among crops. Her consorts are
the sky god DIEVS and the moon god MENESS.

**Saturnus**

Astral god. Roman. Identified with the planet Saturn, but thought to
have originated as an **Sˇausˇka**

agricultural deity concerned with sowing of Fertility goddess. Hittite
and Hurrian. Of Hur-seed. A sanctuary existed on the Roman forum rian
origin, Sˇausˇka was adopted by the Hittite from as early as 450 BC,
also functioning as the state religion. She is also identified with war
and imperial treasury. Saturnus was celebrated is particularly renowned
as a goddess of healing.

in the *Saturnalia* festival (December 17-19) dur-She is depicted in
human form with wings, standing which masters and slaves exchanged roles
ing with a lion and accompanied by two atten-and candles were given as
gifts to symbolize the dants. Sˇausˇka is known in detail only because
she winter darkness.

became the patron goddess of the Hittite king Hattusilis II (1420-1400
BC).

**Satyabhama**

*(with true luster)*

Goddess. Hindu-Dravidian (Tamil). Known **Savari**

particularly from southern India as the second Goddess of terrifying
appearance. Buddhist-Lamaist consort of KRSNA, who stands on her left;

\[Tibet\]. One of a group of *gauris*. Color: white.

also as the secorid consort of VISŇU. Attribute: Attributes: holding the
mountain known as Meru.

a flower.

**Savea Si'uleo**

**Satyr**

God of the dead. Polynesian. The brother of Woodland god. Greco-Roman.
Generic term SALEVAO, god of rocks.

for an assortment of divine beings with a human torso and the legs, hair
and horns of a goat. They include the god PAN and the **Savitar**
*(impeller)*

demigod Silenus who raised the adolescent Sun god. Hindu (Puranic). The
original Vedic BACCHUS.

list of six descendants of the goddess ADITI or

[]{#index_split_006.html#p294}**Semele** 279

ADITYAS, all of whom take the role of sun gods **Sěd**

was, in later times, enlarged to twelve, including Guardian god.
Egyptian. Popular as a personal Savitar. The god of the rising and
setting sun.

deity and often identified on protective amulets.

Color: golden. Attributes: club, prayer wheel and two lotuses.

**Sedna**

Sea goddess. Inuit \[Baffin Land\]. The mother of **Saxnot**

all the creatures of the sea and invoked by fisher-Tutelary god. Saxon.
He is mentioned beside men.

Woden and Thunor as one of the deities to be renounced at Christian
baptism. As Saxneat he was allegedly the founder of the Saxon royal
**Sefkhet-Abwy**

*(she who has seven horns)*

dynasty in Essex. The name may derive from Local goddess of libraries
and writing. Egyptian.

the word *sahsginot* meaning "companion of the Probably a form of the
goddess SESˇAT. Depicted sword." He may also equate with the German in
human form bearing a seven-pointed star or god Tyr.

rosette on her head below a bow-shaped object.

**Sˇay**

**Sekhet-Hor**

Minor god of destiny. Egyptian. Depicted Cow goddess. Egyptian (Lower).
The foster-wholly in human form. Sˇay is mentioned in the mother of the
god HORUS and particularly *Ani* papyrus as being present at the ritual
of invoked to safeguard cattle.

the weighing of the heart, in company with funerary goddesses including
Meskhenet, SĚPSET and RENENUTET. In Greco-Roman **Selardi**

times he was syncretized with the snake god Moon god. Urartian
\[Armenia\]. The counterpart Agathodaimon.

of the Mesopotamian deity SIN.

**Sebitti**

**Selene** *(radiant)*

Group of minor war gods. Mesopotamian (Baby-Moon goddess. Greek. The
daughter of HYPER-lonian-Akkadian). The children of the god ANU

ION (a TITAN) and sister of the sun god HELIOS.

who follow the war god ERRA into battle. They The tutelary deity of
magicians, she rides in a are, in alternative traditions, of good or
evil influ-chariot drawn by two horses. According to legend ence. In
Greek tradition they become the she fell in love with the sleeping
Endymion. She Pleiades.

becomes largely syncretized with HEKATE and in Roman culture equates
with the goddess LUNA.

**Securita**

Guardian goddess. Roman. She was invoked to **Semele** *(earth)*

ensure the continuing stability of the Roman Mother goddess. Greco-Roman
but probably of empire.

Thracian or Phrygian origin. According to legend

[]{#index_split_006.html#p295}280 **Semnocosus** she was the mortal
daughter of Cadmos and remedial properties. A bronze statuette of a
god-became the mother of the god DIONYSOS (BAC-dess was found wearing a
diadem, with arms CHUS) after a brief liaison with ZEUS (JUPITER),
spread and standing in a boat. The prow is in the also in mortal guise.
Semele was burned to death shape of a duck, her sacred animal, with a
cake in on Olympus, unable to withstand the presence of its mouth. Also
found were models of dogs, an Zeus in godly form, but was subsequently
deified animal specifically associated with healing by him.

through its affinity with the Greco-Roman physician deity AESCULAPIUS.

**Semnocosus**

God of war. Romano-Iberian. Popular locally **Sěrida**

with troops of the Roman legions who occasion-Mother goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

ally sacrificed prisoners to him.

Became known as AYA in the Akkadian pantheon.

**Senx**

**Serket(-hetyt)**

Sun god. Bella Coola Indian \[British Columbia, Minor mortuary goddess.
Egyptian. Known Canada\]. The ruler of the lower heaven, Sonx, in from
the middle of the third millennium BC, she which is situated the home of
the gods, Nusmeta protects the throne of the king in the guise of a (the
house of myths). The only deity to whom the scorpion. She is depicted in
human form wear-Bella Coola pray and make offerings. Hunters ing a
headpiece in the form of a scorpion with throw small pieces of mountain
goat or seal flesh its sting raised. In the Pyramid Texts she is the
into a sacrificial fire. Also Ta'ata (our father); mother of the
scorpion god NEHEBU-KAU. In Smai'yakila (sacred one).

her role as a mortuary goddess she is partly responsible for guarding
the jars containing the viscera of the deceased. Although she is never
**Sěpset**

identified as warding off the effect of scorpion Local funerary goddess.
Egyptian. Known chiefly stings, her influence has been regarded as
effec-at Memphis, where she appears as an attendant at tive against
other venomous attacks. Also Selkis the ritual of the weighing of the
heart.

(Greek).

**Sequana**

**Sesa(naga)** *(remainder)* River goddess. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). The
tute-Snake god or *naga*. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and lary goddess of the
Sequanae tribe. A pre-Roman Puranic). The great serpent lying in the
primeval sanctuary northwest of Dijon near the source of sea and
encircling the world. The son of KASYAPA the Seine has yielded more than
200 wooden and KADRU. A many-headed attendant on VISŇU

votive statuettes and models of limbs, heads and who uses the snake as a
couch on which to rest body organs, attesting to Sequana's importance as
between cycles of the universe. Its many hoods a goddess of healing.
During the Roman occupa-overshadow and protect him. Not technically a
tion the site of Fontes Sequanae was sacred to deity but important
enough in literature to be her and was again considered to have healing
and included here. Also Adisesa; ANANTA.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p296}**SETH** 281

**Sesˇat**

**SYNONYMS** Set, Setekh, Setesˇ, SUTEKH, Suty.

Goddess of libraries and the art of writing. Egypt-CENTER(S) OF CULT
chiefly a sanctuary in Upper ian. Known from 2500 BC, or earlier, until
the end Egypt at Ombos-Naqada, but also in Lower of Egyptian history
circa AD 400. She is depicted Egypt, in the northeast of the Nile delta.

anthropomorphically bearing a seven-pointed star **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures, stone reliefs, wall or rosette on her head, sometimes atop a
wand and paintings, etc.

below a bow-shaped object. Early in her career she **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts, coffin texts, was associated with the ritual of
"stretching the *Book of the Dead*, etc.

cord" during which boundary poles were rammed into the ground by the
king before measuring out Seth is a deity who generally represents
hostility the foundations of a sanctuary. As a scribe she and violence,
but who has also claimed consider-recorded the lists of foreign captives
and their tribable respect. His parents are GEB and NUT and utes. At
Karnak in Upper Egypt and at Dendara she his fellow siblings include
ISIS, OSIRIS and NEPH-recorded the royal jubilees on a notched palm
stem.

THYS, who at times is also seen as his consort.

*See also* SEFKHET-ABWY.

More typically he is linked with Semitic war goddesses including ANAT
and ASTARTE. Legend has it that he tore himself violently from his
mother's **Sese**

womb. He is depicted in human form with the Chthonic goddess. Ngbandi
\[Democratic Repub-head of an animal that seems to bear faint simi-lic
of Congo, central Africa\]. One of seven deities larity to an aardvark
with erect ears and a long invoked at sunrise each day.

curving snout. He is also depicted in wholly animal form, in which case
the beast bears no real similarity to any living creature, but has a
stiffly **Sěsmetet**

erect tail. Other animals symbolizing the god Egyptian goddess.

include the oryx, pig, boar and the hippopotamus *See also* SAKHMET.

when it is a disruptive element of the river. Seth is also represented
by the crocodile (see Geb).

**Seta**

Sometime during the middle of the third mil-Fertility goddess. Pokot and
Suk \[Uganda and lennium, in the II Dynasty, there was a break with
western Kenya, East Africa\]. The consort of the the tradition whereby
the kings of Egypt were creator god T

linked with the god H

ORORUT who is embodied in the ORUS. The falcon symbol-Pleiades. Their
children are I ism of Horus was replaced with that of the crea-LAT, the
rain god;

A

ture of Seth. Several Egyptian rulers followed his RAWA, the moon
goddess; and Topoh, the evening star. The appearance of the Pleiades in
the cult closely. Tuthmosis III in the XVIII Dynasty, night sky marks
the start of the planting season.

for example, titled himself "the beloved of Seth."

In the Osirian legend first recorded in the Pyramid Texts and later
popularized and embellished **SETH**

by the Greek writer Plutarch, Seth is the jealous **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
God of chaos and adversity.

adversary of his brother Osiris (see Osiris for **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** from 3000 BC or details). Later he fought an eighty-year war
of earlier until the end of Egyptian history, circa attrition with the
son of Osiris, the falcon god AD 400.

Horus (see also Horus). During this time, the

[]{#index_split_006.html#p297}282 **Seyon**

implication remains that he was favored by the natural beings called
Sga'na Qeda's for whom the sun god and only forceful wrangling resulted
in land was first created. Also Masset San.

victory falling to Horus as rightful overlord of the two Egyptian
kingdoms. A separate mythology credits Seth with defense of the sun god
R

**Shadanana-Subrahmanya**

E

as he is about to be swallowed by Apophis, the Form of the god
KARTTIKEYA. Hindu (Puranic).

perennially hostile serpent god of the under-The form possesses six
heads and twelve arms.

world. The so-called *Book of the Dead* accounts According to legend,
the six heads arose because Seth as the "lord of the northern sky" who
controls the fire god AGNI had an adulterous relationship the storm
clouds and thunder.

with the six consorts of the risis (astral gods) who Rameses II, in a
treaty with the Hittites, all needed to suckle the offspring. Like
Kart-implied a fusion of Seth with the Hittite storm tikeya, he is
usually depicted riding on a peacock.

god TESˇUB.

**Shang Kuo-Lao**

Immortal being. Taoist (Chinese). One of the **Seyon**

*(the red one)*

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, tradition Creator god. Dravidian
(Tamil) \[southern India has it that he was embodied as a bat which and
Sri Lanka\]. An early deity associated particu-achieved immortality in
human form. His sacred larly with hilly regions in parts of southern
India animal is an ass. Attributes include drum and and thought to live
in trees. Also Muruga.

drumsticks.

*See also* BA XIAN.

**Sězmu**

Minor god of wine and oil presses. Egyptian.

**Shang Ti**

Known from circa 3000 BC until the end of Creator god. Taoist (Chinese).

`</i>`{=html}

*Egyptian history, circa AD 400. In later iconogra-See also* YU HUANG
SHANG TI.

phy he is depicted as a lion, but more generally is in human form. Sězmu
had a definite cult following in the fertile Faiyum region of the Nile
valley, **Shango**

but was probably represented in most sanctuaries, Chthonic storm god.
Yoruba \[Nigeria, West particularly where ritual unguents were made and
Africa\]. As an earth deity he was once a mortal stored. He is
recognized in both benign and man, the king of Oyo, who transformed
himself malevolent roles. In the latter he is reputed to into an
immortal. According to tradition, during squeeze human heads like
grapes, but in benefi-his life he breathed tongues of fire. He then cent
mood he provides aromatic oils and oint-ascended into the sky by
climbing a golden chain ments.

and became the god of thunder and lightning. He is also god of justice,
punishing thieves and liars.

His consorts include OYA, Oshun and Oba. Cult **Sga'na**

followers of Shango are believed to be able to Sea god. Haida Indian
\[Queen Charlotte Island, make lightning strike an adversary. In shrines
to Canada\]. Embodied in the killer whale ( *Orca*).

Shango, the image of the god is adorned with a The universe is believed
to be inhabited by super-ram's head. Also SANGO.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p298}**Shina-Tsu-Hime** 283

**Shani**

**gShen-Lha-Odkhar**

Astral god and bringer of misfortune. Hindu God of light. Bon
(pre-Lamaist) \[Tibet\]. In the (late). The cult of Shani evolved in
about the ancient religion he is a creator deity from whom eighth
century AD with the advance of Indian all other gods are engendered. In
Lamaism he astronomy. He is propitiated frequently to ward evolves into
a god of wisdom.

off ill-luck and may be depicted sitting on a lotus or riding in a
chariot. Attribute: a staff.

**gShen-Rab**

Supreme god. Bon (pre-Lamaist) \[Tibet\]. In the **Shankpana**

ancient religion he is the remote and barely Plague god. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\]. The defined creator deity. Attributes include
a lotus son of S

and swastika.

HANGO, he is credited with having once been a god of war who invaded the
country (as a disease). He is particularly identified with smallpox. His
symbol is the sesame plant which takes **Shichi-Fuku-Jin**

the form of a taboo and brings disease to those Gods of luck. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The seven principal who take it into their house. A festival
is held in deities concerned with fortune: EBISU, DAIKOKU, September to
propitiate Shankpana with sacri-BENTEN-SAN, BISHAMON, FUKUROKUJU, HOTEI
fices of animals and fruit.

and JUNROJIN. The group is often represented together on their treasure
ship Takara-Bune, which carries various magical devices including a hat
of invisibility, a roll of brocade, an inex-Sheela Na Gig

haustible purse, keys to the divine treasure house Mother goddess.
Celtic (Irish). The primal earth and so on.

mother closely associated with life and death. One of the rare
depictions of Irish Celtic deities that have survived into the Christian
era. She is shown **Shina-Tsu-Niko**

naked, with large breasts, with her legs apart and God of winds. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The most senior of holding open her vagina. The image
frequently his group of wind deities, he disperses the morn-adorns walls
of Irish churches. Also Sheila na ing mists and brings soft rustling
breezes. His Cioch.

consort is Shina-Tsu-Hime and the couple are extensively worshiped by
farmers and seafarers.

They were allegedly responsible for bringing **Shen Nung**

about a miracle in the thirteenth century AD when God of agriculture.
Chinese. Known as the divine they kept at bay, with off-shore winds, the
army of farmer. According to tradition, during his life-Gengis Khan.
They are honored in the main Ise-time he invented the plough and taught
basic Jingu temple of Shintoism but their chief sanctu-agriculture and
the use of herbs. In a more ary is at Tatta, a small town in Yamamoto.
Also destructive aspect, he is also the god of the hot
Shina-Tobe-No-Mikoto.

winds. He is depicted with the head of an ox and is regarded by some
authors as a successor to NU

KUA. Also Shen Nong.

**Shina-Tsu-Hime**

See SHINA-TSU-NIKO.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p299}284 **Shomde**

**Shomde**

**Si**

Creator god of localized observance. Kafir Moon god. Chimu Indian
(pre-Columbian)

\[Afghanistan\]. Known from various villages in the

\[coastal regions of Peru\]. The head of the pan-southern Hindukush.
Shomde is regarded either theon and guardian of weather and of harvests.

as equating or senior to the more generally rec-He is depicted subtended
by a sickle moon, ognized god IMRA. According to observers he wearing a
feathered crown and an armored provides gold, silver and silk as well as
butter, projection on his back. May also be represented cheese, cream
and flour. The main sanctuary was as a goddess.

probably at the village of Dewa and in various wooden sculptures Shomde
is depicted in human form. Also Wushum; Usum.

**Sia**

God of perception. Egyptian. Minor deity depicted at RE's right hand
where he holds the **Shong Li-Kuan**

papyrus of intellect. He travels in the sun god's Immortal being. Taoist
(Chinese). One of the barque. According to legend he was one of several

"eight immortals" of Taoist mythology, he was deities formed in drops of
blood falling from Re's once a mortal being who achieved immortality
penis.

through his lifestyle. Attributes include a fan which he waves over the
dead to revive them.

*See also* BA XIAN.

**Sˇi'a**

Minor attendant goddess. Western Semitic (Phoenician). The
personification of the holiness **Shong-Kui**

of sanctuaries of BAAL SˇAMIN. In Hellenic times God of literature.
Taoist (Chinese). According to she may have become syncretized with
TYCHE.

tradition he committed suicide when he failed in his examinations. Also
a guardian deity against demons, his attribute is a sword.

**Siddhi**

*(accomplishment, success)*

Minor goddess of good fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A deity who
grants favors. Sometimes **Shou Lao**

associated with the elephant god GANESA or God of longevity. Chinese. He
originates as an MAHA-GANAPATI, on whose knee she may sit. In astral
deity but comes to head the heavenly min-earlier times she was described
as a consort of istry responsible for setting the span of a person's
BHAGA.

life. He is also known as Nan-ji Hsian Weng, "the ancient of the South
Pole." His sacred animal is the crane, embodiment of long life.

**Si'duku**

Mother spirit. Kamchadal \[southeastern Siberia\]. The daughter of
KUTKHU, Si'duku is **Shurdi**

the consort of her brother TI'ZIL-KUTKHU and Storm god. Illyrian
\[Albania\]. Believed to send the mother of Amle'i. Amle'i married
another thunder and lightning and revered into more unnamed daughter of
Si'duku and fathered the recent times.

Kamchadal race.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p300}**Sina** 285

**Siduri**

**NOTE:** the term also defines the symbolic use Minor goddess of
brewing. Mesopotamian (Baby-of fire.

lonian-Akkadian). Also identified with wisdom.

**Silaparamita** *(perfection of character)* **Sif**

Philosophical deity. Buddhist. Spiritual offspring Corn goddess. Nordic
(Icelandic) and Germanic.

of RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: white. Attributes: The consort of THOR. She is
mentioned in the floral prayer wheel and jeweled staff.

Eddaic *Lay of Lokasenna* and in the *Lay of Har-barth.* According to
Snorri Sturluson she was originally a prophetess called Sibyl. She
possesses **Silma Inua**

great beauty and has long golden hair. Her sons Supreme god. Inuit. A
remote and vaguely are U

defined figure only rarely invoked or prayed to.

LL and Loridi. According to tradition, LOKI cut off Sif's hair in
mischief, but when confronted and threatened by Thor, he had the dwarfs
make **Silvanus**

her a magical hairpiece of pure gold which, when Minor god of woodlands
and forests. Roman. Wor-it touched her head, became a living part of her
ship of Silvanus seems largely to have been limited and grew.

to northern Italy. He became incorporated into the Celtic pantheon where
his symbolism includes a bill-hook, pots and hammers. His sacred animal
is **Sigyn**

the stag. The name was extended to embrace Goddess. Nordic (Icelandic).
The consort of groups of woodland deities, the Silvani or Silvanae.

LOKI and listed among the AESIR goddesses. Her son is Nari or Narfi.
According to tradition, SKADI, the consort of NJORD, set a poisonous
**Si'mskalin**

snake to drip poison on to a captive Loki but Guardian spirit. Kamchadal
\[southeastern Siberia\].

Sigyn collected most of the venom in a bowl and One of two sons of
KUTKHU.

threw it away.

**Sin**

**Sikhandin**

*(with a tuft of hair)*

Moon god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Minor deity. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). One Akkadian). Derived from the older Sumerian of a group of
emancipated VIDYESVARAS (lords of model of NANNA. His consort is NIKKAL
(NIN-knowledge) considered to be aspects of SˇIVA.

GAL). He is symbolized by the new moon and Attributes: knife and sword.

perceived as a bull whose horns are the crescent of the moon. Cult
centers are identified at Ur, Harran and Neirab. Also Suen (archaic).

**Sikhin**

Physician god. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Accounted among one of a series of medicine **Sina**

*buddhas* or SMAN-BLA *.* Typically depicted with Moon goddess.
Polynesian (Samoan).

stretched earlobes. Color: yellowish red.

*See also* HINA.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p301}286 **Sindhu**

**Sindhu**

**Sipe Gialmo**

River goddess. Hindu (Vedic). Identified only in Mother goddess. Bon
(pre-Lamaist) \[Tibet\]. The the *Rg Veda* and of unknown source.

so-called "queen of the world." Her animal is a mule. Attributes:
banner, bowl, parasol, swastika, sword and trident. Three-eyed.

**Singala**

Local god. Pre-Islamic northern Arabian.

Mentioned only in name by the Babylonian **Sipylene**

king Nabonidus, worshiped at Taima and influ-Mother goddess. Smyrna
(Anatolia) \[west coast of enced strongly by Egyptian culture.

Turkey\]. The localized name of the great mother, *See also* SALM OF
MAHRAM.

worshiped in the Metroon sanctuary.

**Sinhanada**

*(lion's roar)*

**Sirara**

Physician god. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. A vari-Goddess of the Persian
Gulf. Mesopotamian ety of AVALOKITESVARA. Typically depicted with
(Sumerian and Babylonian-Akkadian). In creation stretched earlobes and
attended by a lion. Color: mythology she is given charge over the waters
of white. Attributes: cup, fly whisk, image of the the Gulf by the god
ENKI.

AMITABHA on the crown, lotus, moon disc, rosary, skin, snake, sword and
trident. Three-eyed. Also accounted among one of a series of medicine
**Sirona**

*buddhas* or SMAN-BLA.

Local goddess of healing. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Known from limited
inscriptions in which she is usually associated with the god GRANNUS or
**Sinivali**

with the Celtic APOLLO. A sculpture from Minor goddess of prosperity.
Hindu (Vedic).

Hochscheid in the Moselle basin in Germany Associated specifically with
the boon of children.

describes her with a snake round her wrist reach-The mistress of the
nuclear family. She is depicted ing toward a bowl of three eggs in her
left hand.

as a matronly lady.

She may also have a small lapdog. Some authors suggest she has sky
associations.

*See also* DIVONA and ONUAVA.

**Sins Sga'nagwai**

*(power of the shining*

*heavens)*

Supreme god. Haida Indian \[Queen Charlotte **Sirsir**

Island, Canada\]. The god who gives power to all God of mariners.
Mesopotamian (Babylonian-things.

Akkadian). The guardian of boatmen.

**Siofn**

**Sirtur**

Goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). Listed by Snorri Sheep goddess.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian and ( *Prose Edda*) as one of the AESIR
goddesses.

Babylonian-Akkadian). Known from inscriptions

[]{#index_split_006.html#p302}**Sitatara** 287

and passing comments in texts. Syncretized with inner fire of her
purity, Rama grudgingly has her NINSUN.

back, though only briefly. His doubts return and, pregnant, she is
banished to exile where she gives birth to twin sons. Rama's rejection
finally takes **Sisyphos**

its toll. Sita begs her mother, the earth, for sal-Sun god. Corinthian.
Specifically the god of the vation, whereupon a golden throne rises from
faded sun, probably equating to the Hittite the ground. She takes her
place on it and weather god TESˇUB.

descends forever while Rama is left eternally to mourn his loss.
Attributes: blue lotus and a single braid of hair.

**SITA** *(furrow)*

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Epic and Puranic) \[India\].

Chthonic or earth goddess.

**Sitala(mata)**

*(possibly meaning 'mother cold')* **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 300
BC and Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One earlier through to
present day times.

of seven SAKTIS who in later Hinduism became **SYNONYMS** an *avatara*
of LAKSMI.

regarded as of evil intent, inflicting sickness. Par-CENTER(S) OF CULT
none specific.

ticularly known from Bengal where she may be **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally in bronze, identified with the goddess KALI.
Usually stand-but also in stone.

ing naked upon a lotus or riding an ass. Alterna-LITERARY SOURCES
*Ramayana of Valmiki* and later tively symbolized by a stone on which a
face is Puranic literature.

painted. Attribute: waterjar.

In Vedic mythology Sita is strictly an earth deity, born from a furrow
and associated with plough-Sitapatra *(with a white umbrella)* ing and
ploughed fields. She appears as the con-Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An
emanation of sort of the rain gods INDRA and PARJANYA. She VAIROCANA and
a female BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-

usually stands to the right of RAMA. In later designate. Color: white.
Attributes: arrow, bow, times, effectively from AD 200 onward, Sita (see
hook, noose, parasol, prayer wheel and white also RADHA) is the consort
of Rama, one of the staff. Sometimes three-eyed and three-headed.

major reincarnations of the god VISŇU, though she is generally eclipsed
by the goddess Laksmi with whom she is seen as a separate aspect.

**Sitatara** *(the 'white Tara')* Legend gives Sita an unhappy life,
though she Goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. Of mild dis-epitomizes
the perfect Hindu wife. Early in her position, she is regarded as one of
the forms of the marriage to Rama she is abducted by the foreign goddess
TARA and an emanation of AMOGHASID-god Ravana, who carries her off to
Lanka \[Sri DHI or VAIROCANA. In later times she became iden-Lanka\],
where he imprisons her in a garden.

tified as a female variety of AVALOKITESVARA Maintaining total fidelity
to her husband, she PADMAPANI. By tradition she is the incarnation of
returns to him inviolate, but he is skeptical of a Chinese princess.
Color: white. Attributes: arrow, her purity and rejects her. Eventually,
when she blue or white lotus, bow, image of Amoghasiddhi, has threatened
to immolate herself through the jewel, moon disc and rosary. Three- or
seven-eyed.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p303}288 **SˇIVA**

**SˇIVA** *(the destroyer)* aspects of his own divine power. As the
ascetic, **ORIGIN** Hindu \[India\]. Principal creative and represented
by the *Yogi*, he is in his destructive destructive god.

aspect. His consorts are Kali and DURGA. He **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 300 BC, and destroys without emotion. The *Yogi* is naked,
probably earlier as Rudra, until present.

smeared with ashes and with matted hair, sitting **SYNONYMS** accredited
with more than a thousand under a banyan tree holding a beggar's bowl.
As epithets in Hindu writings (see also BHAIRAVA, the "lord of the
dance," NATARAJA, Sˇiva's steps KHANDOBA).

follow the rhythm of the universal forces. He **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Benares, etc.

dances in a circle of fire, treading upon the **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally in bronze, dwarfish figure who is the
personification of but also in stone; reliefs.

ignorance (see also VAMANA). In this aspect he **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Ramayana* epic and Puranic can be drawn as a jolly figure, a drinker of
wine texts.

and a hunter. As the *linga,* the form of Sˇiva which devotees generally
worship, he is the symbol of SˇIVA is a deity with the linked roles of
both creator creative powers. In his cosmic capacity he and destroyer of
life, more generally the latter. He appears as Nataraja.

personifies the inexorable passage of time and out Legend has it that
Sˇiva lives in Kailas, a place of destruction he creates new life. He
may have beyond the Himalaya. The Lingayats, a particu-evolved from the
Vedic storm god RUDRA, though lar Saivite sect founded in the twelfth
century AD, he is now thought to be an older pre-Indo-Euro-may carry a
small stone *linga* mounted in a silver pean deity whose attributes
appear on seals from box and worn round the neck or arm. Chiefly the
Indus Valley civilization. His consort, or more centered on southern
India, sanctuaries to Sˇiva precisely his female aspect, is Sakti, but
he is also are often home to *devadasis*, troupes of dancing closely
linked with the terrible KALI and the god-girls who also serve as cultic
prostitutes. Sˇiva also dess SATI.

enjoys popular worship as a domestic deity.

He is generally depicted in the role of an asce-See also PANCANANA.

tic with a blue-painted throat, attributed to holding the primal poison
HALAHALA in his throat before swallowing it to save mankind from its
**Sivini**

deadly effect. His sacred animal is the bull Sun god. Urartian
\[Armenia\]. Known from NANDI. He bears four arms (less commonly two)
inscriptions.

which hold a variety of attributes including a bow, a club to which is
fastened a skull, a drum ( *damaru*) *,* representing the rhythm of
creation, **Sivottama** *(highest Sˇiva)* and a noose. He has a strong
association with Minor god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of fire and
may hold a ball of flame---the destructive a group of emancipated
VIDYESVARAS (lords of corollary to creation. His symbol is the *linga*
knowledge) considered to be aspects of SˇIVA.

(phallus), often accompanied by the female *yoni* and these objects in
stone may form the focus of worship.

**Skadi**

The Saivite sect envisage Sˇiva as creator, pre-Goddess. Nordic
(Icelandic). One of the AESIR

server and destroyer and he is manifest in three goddesses. The daughter
of the giant Thiassi and

[]{#index_split_006.html#p304}**Sobek** 289

consort of the god NJORD. By tradition she lives peacock feather and
staff. He may also carry a apart from her husband, he preferring the
coast wider assortment of objects and weapons. As and she the mountains.
She is described as "ski Karttikeya he is often depicted bearing six
heads lady," a huntress who travels on skis and hunts and twelve arms.

game with a bow. She is constantly at odds with the god LOKI and on one
occasion, when he had been captured and held down with stones, she
**Smertrios**

tried to poison him by suspending a poisonous God of war. Celtic
(Gallic). The tutelary deity of snake over his face. Loki's consort
SIGYN saved the Treveri. Allegedly the subject of a votive mon-him by
collecting the venom in a bowl.

ument which depicts a bearded god holding a snake.

**SKANDA**

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Epic and Puranic) \[India\]. God of **Smrti**

*(tradition)*

war.

Minor god. Buddhist (Mahayana).

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 300 BC or earlier until present.

**SYNONYMS** Kumara; KARTTIKEYA; SUBRAHMANYA; **Snulk'ulxa'Is**

many other minor epithets.

Archetypal god. Bella Coola Indian \[British **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
various.

Columbia, Canada\]. The old ruler of mankind, **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally in bronze, who provided a conflict of benign and
malevolent but also in stone.

treatment. He was superseded by the gods SENX

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Ramayana* and *Mahabharata* and ALK'UNTA'M.

epics; Puranic texts.

Regarded as the leader of the divine army of gods.

**So**

One of the sons of SˇIVA, his birth is accounted in Weather god. Ewe and
Hua \[Togo and south-bizarre fashion. The gods persuaded Sˇiva and
eastern Ghana, West Africa\]. An emanation of PARVATI to curb their
incessant love-making. The the combined personae of the deities SOGBLEN

vast quantity of unused semen then had to be dis-and SODZA.

posed of. After shuttling it between fire (AGNI) and water (Ganges),
BRAHMA placed it on the mountain of the rising sun where, after ten
mil-Sobek *(rager)*

lennia, it became Skanda.

God epitomizing the might of the pharaohs.

His consorts include KAUMARI (DEVASENA) and Egyptian. Said to be the son
of NEITH, the cre-VALLI, and his sons are Sakha, Visakha and ator
goddess of Sais. He is depicted as a crocodile NAIGAMEYA. Perceived as
virile and youthful, his wearing a plumed headdress, or as a part-human
name may signify the emission of semen. He is hybrid. The crocodile
imagery suggests an ability also seen as "one who jumps" while fighting
and to attack and kill with sudden speed. Sobek's cult his sacred
animals include the peacock and the was extensive along the Nile valley,
but was par-cockerel, the latter being both aggressive and a ticularly
prominent in the fertile Faiyum region.

jumper. Attributes: banner, cockerel, hatchet, Near Aswan in Upper Egypt
a sanctuary dedi-

[]{#index_split_006.html#p305}290 **Sodasi**

cated to Sobek identifies him as the consort of

"though his legs do not walk he knows everything HATHOR and the father
of KHONSU. Also Suchos under heaven."

(Greek).

**Sokar**

**Sodasi** *(girl of sixteen)* Chthonic underworld god. Egyptian.
Guardian Minor goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One deity of the
necropolis at Memphis with possible of a group of MAHAVIDYAS
personifying the SAKTI fertility connotations and with strong links to
of SˇIVA. Aspects include Divyaratri.

OSIRIS beside whom he is also perceived as a restored god of the dead.
He is also syncretized with the Memphis creator god PTAH in the Old
**Sodza**

Kingdom (circa 4500 BC), where he may have Sky god. Ewe \[Togo, West
Africa\]. Propitiated originated as a god of various crafts associated
with yams and the sacrifice of a white sheep in an with the manufacture
of funerary trappings. He is annual festival and his priests pray to him
weekly depicted either as a hawk on a boat, or in human to send rain.
The priests wear white robes.

form with the head of a hawk and an elaborate *atef* crown (see Osiris).
Sokar also enjoyed a major cult at Thebes where, in an annual festival
cele-Sogblen

brating the healthy continuation of the divine Messenger god. Ewe and
Hua \[Togo and south-kingship, he was conveyed in an elaborate barque.

eastern Ghana, West Africa\]. Considered to Also Sokaris (Greek).

relay the prayers of devotees to the great gods and to return with
blessings or punishment. Generally benevolent, bringing the boon
**Soko**

of fertile crops and children. He is propitiated Sky god. Nupe
\[Nigeria, West Africa\]. The name with the sacrifice of a white sheep
in an annual refers specifically to the dark sky at the begin-festival.

ning of the rainy season which stimulates the growth of crops.

**Sogbo**

Storm god. Fon \[Benin, West Africa\]. The sibling **Sol (1)**

of the gods LISA and MAWU, he controls thunder Sun god. Roman. Known by
the full title of Sol and lightning and is a god of fire and rain.

Indiges, meaning "the indigenous Sol," which may suggest a purely Roman
cult on the Quirinal Hill, but there are also inferences that this deity
is of **Sohodo-No-Kami**

more ancient origin. Coins from southern Italy God of scarecrows. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Identified as depicting the god with a radiate image date
back the apotheosis of the actual scarecrow made by to circa 200 BC but
he rose to particular promi-Japanese farmers and known as a *kakashi.*
Tradi-nence during the republican period. His festival tionally it is
constructed from reeds and wears a was celebrated annually on August 9.
Nero had a round peasant hat. According to the sacred texts, huge statue
of himself, as Sol, erected in Rome

[]{#index_split_006.html#p306}**SOPHIA** 291

and the emperor Aurelian elevated Sol to Lethe river. He is depicted by
Ovid dressed in supreme god in the Roman pantheon when black but with
his robe scattered with stars, *Jupiter Conservator* gave way to *Sol
Invictus* (the wearing a crown of poppies and holding a gob-unconquered
sun). Sol may sometimes be linked let of opium juice. His attendant is
MORPHEUS

with AURORA, the goddess of dawn.

and he oversees the spirits of dreams and night-mares. Particularly
noted from the art of the Lacedaemonians who placed statues of Somnus
**Sol (2)**

and MORS side by side.

Sun goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). One of the AESIR goddesses. The
daughter of Nubdilfaeri (Mundilferi). She drives the horses which draw
**Somtus**

See HARSOMTUS.

the sun chariot across the sky.

**Sopedu**

**Soma**

*(essence)*

Guardian deity. Egyptian. A god who protects the Minor god. Hindu
(Vedic, Epic and Puranic).

eastern border, usually depicted as a falcon or a The deification of the
sacred yellow drink *soma.*

Bedouin with a headdress of tall plumes. His cult Also the consort of
SURYA. Regarded in later Hin-was followed chiefly at Saft el-Henna in
the Nile duism as the *dikpala* of the northern direction and delta.
Sopedu is linked in Pyramid Texts with the as one of a group of VASU
deities answering to the hawk god HORUS. He also acted as a patron deity
god INDRA. Attributes: hook, lotus and prayer of the turquoise mines in
the Sinai with inscrip-wheel.

tions at Serabit el-Khadim. Also Sopdu.

*See also* CANDRA.

**SOPHIA** *(wisdom)*

**Somaskanda**

**ORIGIN** Greek principle adopted by Gnostic God. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). Aspect of Christians. Primordial female force in the the god
SˇIVA. Of uncertain origin, but possibly cosmos.

representing a composite trio of Sˇiva with **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
unknown origins his consort UMA (PARVATI) and his son SKANDA (as to
circa AD 400.

a boy). Four-armed. Attributes of Sˇiva: ax, corpse **SYNONYMS** PISTIS
SOPHIA.

and hatchet. Attribute of Uma: lotus. Attributes **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
undefined cells within the of Skanda: book, headdress, mango fruit and
area of early Christian influence.

ornament.

**ART REFERENCES** none.

**LITERARY**

**SOURCES** Plato and other Greek philosophers; *Nag Hammadi* codices.

**Somnus**

Minor god of sleep. Roman. He equates with According to the Gnostic
Christian writers whose the Greek god HYPNOS. According to legend
thoughts were a syncretization of Jewish, ancient he is one of the two
sons of NYX, goddess of Near Eastern and Greek philosophical elements,
night, and lives in a remote cave beside the SOPHIA descended from
PISTIS (faith) before the

[]{#index_split_006.html#p307}292 **Sore-Gus** formation of the cosmos.
She is described as a like-Soului

ness of Pistis and seems to be the primeval ele-Vegetation god. Hua
\[southeastern Ghana, West ment of light. She acts as a mediator or
"veil"

Africa\]. A benevolent deity who can bestow between the immortal beings
(Archons) and wealth as well as good harvests. He is also god mankind.
She is also the challenger to the primor-of medicine and of the sounds
of music. His dial "shadow" which becomes chaos. In the Nag devotees
wear white and daub white chalk on Hammadi text *On the Origin of the
World,* Pistis their faces. His symbol is the cowrie shell.

Sophia generates YALDABAOTH, the father or

"prime parent" of the seven androgynous beings who rule the heavens in
the likeness of the original **Spandaramet**

authorities so that the likeness may persist forever.

Chthonic goddess. Pre-Christian Armenian.

*See also* Pistis and Yaldabaoth.

Concerned with the fertility of the earth and with death. Under
Christian influence, her name equates with hell.

**Sore-Gus**

Sky god. Hottentot \[Namibia, southern Africa\].

The sun god, embodied in the shape of a golden **Spes**

ram with long fluffy wool.

Goddess of hope. Roman. Foundations of a sanctuary were commenced by the
emperor Tiberius, linked with a similar building dedicated to the
**Sors**

god JANUS. She is associated with gardens and God of luck. Roman.
Derived from the Greek depicted as a young woman bearing a bunch of
model of TYCHE, he is less prominent in the pan-flowers.

theon than the goddess FORTUNA.

**Spiniensis**

**Sothis** *\[Greek\]*

Minor god of agriculture. Roman. Mentioned by Astral goddess. Egyptian.
She heralds the Nile the writer Fabius Pictor, he is the deity
responsi-inundation as the personification of the star ble for the
uprooting of thorn bushes.

Sirius which rises coincidentally in the dawn sky in July. She is
depicted as a nude figure wearing the conical white crown of Lower Egypt
**Sravana**

*(lame cow)*

surmounted by a star. Late in Egyptian history Minor goddess of fortune.
Hindu (Epic and she becomes largely syncretized with ISIS. Also
Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA*; daughter of Sopdet (Egyptian).

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA). Also Srona.

**Souconna**

**Sravistha**

River goddess. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Guardian Minor goddess of
fortune. Hindu (Epic and of the river Saône and known chiefly from
Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA;* daughter of inscriptions at Chalon.

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

[]{#index_split_006.html#p308}**Subhadra** 293

**Sri(devi)**

*(prosperity)*

**Stanitakumara**

1\. Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). An early God. Jain \[India\]. One
of the deities grouped name which was syncretized with that of LAKSMI
under the general title of *BHVANAVASI* (dwelling in to form Sri-Laksmi.

places). Of youthful appearance.

2\. Goddess. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. One of a group of DHARMAPALA
with terrible appearance and royal attire who protect the Dalai Lama. A
manifes-Sterculius

tation of the goddess DEVI sometimes seen in com-Minor god of
agriculture. Roman. Concerned pany with VISŇU, when conventionally she
stands on with the manuring of the fields.

his right. Her breasts are covered by a narrow band of cloth. She may be
invoked to provide wealth (see also Laksmi). Her retinue includes the
goddesses of **Stribog**

the seasons and her animal is a mule. Color: blue.

God of winds. Slav. Mentioned in the *Chronicle of* Attributes: chiefly
cup and staff but on occasion sev-Nestor, and the euphemism "Stribog's
grandchil-eral other objects including a pink lotus. Three-eyed dren"
refers to the winds.

and may be three-headed. Also LHA MO.

3\. Goddess. Jain.

**Styx**

Chthonic underworld goddess. Greek. A daugh-Srikantha

*(beautiful throat)*

ter of OKEANOS and TETHYS, and mother of Minor deity. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). One of a NIKE. The deity of the river Styx beside which the
group of emancipated VIDYESVARAS (lords of gods swear their oaths.

knowledge) considered to be aspects of SˇIVA, in this instance referring
to his darkish blue neck.

Also one of the EKADASARUDRAS or eleven forms **Sˇu**

of RUDRA. Attributes: hatchet and trident.

Primordial god of the air. Egyptian. According to the genealogy of the
priests of Heliopolis, he is the first born of the creator sun god ATUM
and by **Srivasumukhi**

*(excellent-faced)*

his sister TEFNUT is the father of the chthonic Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-god GEB and the sky goddess NUT. Sˇu is typically
dant of VASUDHARA.

represented in human form standing over the supine form of Geb and
holding Nut aloft with his raised arms. He can also, as one of several
**Srivasundhara**

*(earth)*

manifestations of the "eye of RE," be represented Minor goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-as a lion, as can his sister.

dant of VASUDHARA.

**Subhadra**

*(very splendid)*

**Srividyadevi**

*(of excellent knowledge)*

Goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The daugh-Minor goddess. Hindu. A
deity of terrifying ter of VASUDEVA and sister of KRSNA. She may
appearance. Attributes: necklace of bones, teeth.

appear standing beside JAGANNATH.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p309}294 **Subhaga** **Subhaga**

both with springs and with dogs and snakes, Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-which suggest healing and rejuvenating powers dant
of BUDDHAKAPALA.

(dogs were more generally linked with the Roman healing god AESCULAPIUS
than with death).

**Subhamekhala**

*(with a marvellous girdle)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-Suddhodana

*(having pure rice)*

dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

Primordial god. Buddhist. The father of the BUDDHA. The deified king of
the Sakya tribe from which the Buddha descended; his consort is
**Subrahmanya**

MAYADEVI.

Minor warrior deity. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).

A form of KARTTIKEYA which is depicted with **Sudrem**

six heads and twelve arms. Also SHADANANA-Weather god. Kafir
\[Afghanistan\]. Little is known SUBRAHMANYA; see also SKANDA.

of this deity. He was created from the breath of the supreme god IMRA.
Alternatively he sprang from a **SUCELLOS**

juniper branch. His wife is the goddess Nangi-

*(the good striker)*

Wutr and he is the father of the major fertility god-ORIGIN
Romano-Celtic (Gallic).

dess DISANI. He is depicted as a great golden buck **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** prehistoric times with horns reaching to the sky. As a deity
specifi-until Christianization, circa AD 400.

cally concerned with rain, he lives in a sacred lake, **SYNONYMS**
Sucellus.

Sudrem Sur, at which all wild animals must drink **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
various.

once to survive. Also Sujum; Sudaram; Sataram.

**ART REFERENCES** bronze and stone sculpture and reliefs.

**LITERARY SOURCES** votive inscriptions.

**Sudurjaya**

*(very difficult to conquer)* Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One
of sev-Sucellos carries a long-handled hammer and a eral deified BHUMIS
recognized as different spir-cup or dish which is arguably the equal of
the itual spheres through which a disciple passes.

Irish Celtic Dagda's caldron. He is known Color: yellow. Attributes:
emerald and staff.

principally from the valleys of the Rhone and Saône and is often coupled
in art and votive inscriptions with the river goddess NANTO-Sugriva
*(beautiful strong neck)* SUELTA. In at least two instances,
Unterseebach Monkey god. Hindu. The son of the sun god and

\[Lower Rhine\] and Varhely \[Romania\], Sucellos is leader of the
monkey army which, according to accompanied by a raven and a
three-headed dog epic tradition, supported RAMA.

suggesting the Roman guardian of the underworld, Cerberus, and a link
with funerary practices. Sucellos also has associations with **Suijin**

the woodland god SILVANUS, suggesting a Collective name for water gods.
Shinto \[Japan\].

fertility connotation and, in France, is associated These deities are
worshiped at shrines at the

[]{#index_split_006.html#p310}**Sˇulman(u)** 295

sources of irrigation canals, lakes and ponds.

**Sukuna-Hikona**

They are depicted as snakes, eels and fish and God of healing. Shinto
\[Japan\]. With the god invoked particularly by women. Chief among
O-KUNI-NUSHI-NO-MIKOTO, he established the them is the goddess
MIZU-HA-NO-ME.

various methods of healing diseases and the means for control of, and
protection against, wild beasts, snakes, insects, etc. He is also
worshiped as a tute-Sukarasya

*(face of a sow)*

lary god of traders, both maritime and on land. He Minor goddess.
Buddhist.

is the *KAMI* of communications and, during the Japanese Empire period,
was often installed by the authorities in the temples and shrines of
con-Sukla-Tara

quered lands. He is worshiped in Buddhism as Goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). Considered to Yakushi-Bosatsu-Hyojin.

be an emanation of all the DHYANIBUDDHAS

(meditation *buddhas*) *,* but also regarded as being indistinguishable
from the "white Tara" (see also **Suleviae**

TARA). Color: white.

Goddesses of passage. Romano-Celtic (Gallic).

Collective name for female deities associated with crossroads.

**Sukra** *(bright)*

Astral god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). The personification of the planet
Venus and the tutor of **Sulini**

the demons. He may, on occasion, be represented Minor goddess. Hindu. Of
terrible appearance.

as female, owing to the fact that he was once made Animal: lion.
Attribute: trident.

to swallow his attendant Kaca and then restore him to life. Color:
white. Rides in a golden or silver chariot drawn by eight or ten horses.
Attrib-Sulis

utes: book, prayer wheel, purse, staff, treasure and Chthonic underworld
goddess. Romano-Celtic.

waterjar.

Also a deity concerned with knowledge and prophecy. The tutelary goddess
of the thermal waters at Bath, England, she is closely linked with
**Suksma**

*(very small)*

the Roman goddess MINERVA.

Minor deity. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One of a group of emancipated
VIDYESVARAS (lords of knowledge) considered to be aspects of SˇIVA.

**Sˇullat**

Attributes: hatchet and trident.

Minor god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). An attendant of the sun
god SˇAMASˇ.

**Suku**

Creator god. Ovimbundu \[central Angola, West **Sˇulman(u)**

Africa\]. He created the sky, the rivers and moun-Chthonic and fertility
deity. Mesopotamian tains, and the people on earth.

(Babylonian-Akkadian) and western Semitic. Also

[]{#index_split_006.html#p311}296 **Sˇulmanitu** identified as a war
god. Found in Assyria circa **Sumbha**

1400 BC to 700 BC and known from Bronze Age Goddess. Buddhist. A female
*dikpala* or guardian inscriptions at Sidon.

of the nadir direction (her male counterpart is SUMBHARAJA). Color:
blue. Attribute: snake noose.

**Sˇulmanitu**

Fertility goddess. Western Semitic. Concerned with love and war; also
has underworld connec-Sumbharaja

tions. Recognized chiefly at Sidon, but included God. Buddhist. A
*dikpala* or guardian of the nadir in the Ugaritic pantheon. Thought by
some direction. Color: blue. Attributes: jewel, lotus, authors to be the
immediate derivation of the bib-staff and sword. Three-headed.

lical "Shulamite woman" ( *Vetus Testamentum* Song of Solomon 6:13).

**Sumiyoshi-No-Kami**

Sea gods. Shinto \[Japan\]. A general name for **Sˇul-pa-e**

*(youthful radiance)*

guardian deities of seafarers, including fishermen, Fertility and astral
god. Mesopotamian (Sumer-they include the three MUNAKATA-NO-KAMI.

ian). Identified as the personification of the planet They are the focus
of special worship by the Jupiter and, in one list, the consort of the
mother Jingu-Kogo sect, whom they escorted to Korea.

goddess NINHURSAG˜A.

They are also patrons of poets and have a purifying role. The main
sanctuary is the Sumiyoshi Taisha at Osaka.

**Sˇulsaga**

Astral goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumerian).

**Summamus**

Storm god. Etruscan. Specifically a deity respon-Sˇul-utula

sible for lightning and thunderbolts. A sanctuary Tutelary god.
Mesopotamian (Sumerian). Known was dedicated to him in Rome.

only as a personal deity to Entemena, king of the city of Eninnu.

**Sˇumugan**

God of the river plains. Mesopotamian (Sumer-Sumalini *(well-garlanded)*
ian). In creation mythology he is given charge by Minor goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-the god ENKI over the flat alluvial lands
of south-dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

ern Mesopotamia.

**Sumati**

*(very wise)*

**Sun Hou-Shi**

Deification of literature. Buddhist. One of a Monkey god. Chinese. He
emerged from group of DHARANIS *.* Color: yellow. Attributes: ear a
cosmic egg conceived out of emptiness of rice and staff.

and engendered by the wind; he provides

[]{#index_split_006.html#p312}**SURYA (1)** 297

various arts and skills to mankind. According **Suresvara**

*(lord of the gods)*

to tradition he discovered the elixir of immor-God. Hindu (Epic and
Puranic). One of the tality in a fruit which he consumed. Also Sun
eleven EKADASARUDRAS or RUDRA gods. Attrib-Wu-Kong.

utes: arrow, ax, bell, bow, bowl, club, drum, hook, iron rod, lotus,
prayer wheel and trident.

**Sundara** *(charming)*

1\. Goddess. Hindu (Puranic). A prosperous
**Survarnabhadravimalaratnaprabhasa** aspect of the god SˇIVA.

*(the bright, pure jewel splendor)* 2 Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An Physician god.

Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

attendant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

Accounted as one of a series of medicine *buddhas* or SMAN-BLA *.*
Typically depicted with stretched earlobes. Color: yellowish white.

**Suparikirtitanamasri** *(lord with a celebrated* *name)*

Physician god.

Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\] *.*

**SURYA (1)**

Accounted among a series of medicine *buddhas* **ORIGIN** Hindu (Vedic,
Epic and Puranic) or SMAN-BLA *.* Typically depicted with stretched

\[India\]. Sun god.

earlobes. Color: yellow.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1700 BC until present.

**SYNONYMS** Diakara (day-maker); Grahapati (king **Suparnakumara**

of planets); Surya Narayana.

God. Jain \[India\]. One of the groups under the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
the "Black Pagoda" shrine at general title of *BHVANAVASI* (dwelling in
places). Of Konorak in Orissa; also throughout India.

youthful appearance.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures from circa AD 600, including erotic
reliefs at the "Black Pagoda,"

usually in bronze, less frequently in stone.

**Sura** *(wine)*

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Rg Veda* and other Vedic Goddess of wine. Hindu.
She is considered to be texts, Epic and Puranic texts.

of terrible appearance and has no consort. Three-eyed.

In the *Vedas* Surya is a prominent figure, not only the personification
of the sun in the heavens and of cosmic order, but also a source of
infinite **Suraksini**

knowledge. Considered to have been introduced Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-from Iran, he is head of the ADITYA group of sun
dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

deities. He is the son of Dyaus and ADITI and his consorts include
LAKSMI, CHAYA and SANJNA. His children include MANU, REVANTA, YAMA and
**Surangama**

*(bright colored)*

YAMUNA, and a sun goddess also called SURYA.

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). A BODHISATTVA or Surya is depicted either
standing or seated, *buddha-designate.* Color: *white.* Attribute:
*sword.*

sometimes driving a one-wheeled chariot drawn

[]{#index_split_006.html#p313}298 **Surya (2)** across the sky by up to
seven horses. He bears material objects. The god and goddess are four
arms. In northern India he is usually found obliged to join each other
in order to survive, wearing knee-length boots. In the south he goes but
while Susano-Wo recognizes the necessity barefoot. Attributes: band,
club, conch, knife, two for this union, Amaterasu finds his excesses
lotuses, prayer wheel, staff with lion, trident and repugnant. When he
tries to enter her house in war drum. May be three-eyed.

the heavens she hides herself away in a cave from which she emerges only
after considerable effort and ruse on the part of the other members of
the **Surya (2)**

pantheon. Susano-Wo is expelled from heaven Sun goddess. Hindu (Vedic,
Epic and Puranic).

and takes up residence on earth where he first has The daughter of the
sun god SURYA. According to beg food from the goddess O-Ge-Tsu-Hime-to
legend she was courted by all the gods, No-Kami.

but won finally by the twin ASVIN gods with *See also* AMATERASU.

whom she rides in a chariot. Other legends account her consorts to
include SOMA and PUSAN. She is the essence of the cosmos. Also
**Susinak**

Savitr.

Local god. Elamite \[Iran\]. The patron deity of Susa.

**SUSANO-WO**

**ORIGIN** Shinto \[Japan\]. Chthonic and **Sˇutekh**

weather god.

Weather god. Hittite and Hurrian. Of Hurrian **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa AD 600 and origin, but incorporated into the Hittite state
probably earlier until present.

pantheon. Identified on the seal of a Hittite/

**SYNONYMS** none.

Egyptian treaty between Hattusilis II and Rame-CENTER(S) OF CULT
throughout Japan.

ses II in 1271 BC. Probably another name for the **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and paintings.

god TESˇUB.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Nihongi* and *Kojiki* texts.

The brother of the sun goddess AMATERASU, he **Svadha** *(invoked with
offerings)* was born from the nose of the primordial creator Minor
goddess. Hindu. The daughter of DAKSA god IZANAGI and represents the
physical, mate-and PRASUTI. Sometimes identified as a consort of rial
world. His consorts include the goddess RUDRA or AGNI.

Inada-Hime, by whom he fathered a son, Ya-Shima-Ji-Nu-Mi, the
eight-island ruler, and the goddess Kamu-O-Ichi-Hime. His offspring by
**Svantevit**

her include the great harvest god O-TOSHI-NO-God of war. Pre-Christian
Latvian. Mentioned KAMI.

by the author Saxo Grammaticus as riding upon The appearance of
Susano-Wo and Amaterasu a white horse and holding a cornucopia, he is in
the creation account marks the final separation known locally from the
island of Rügen. Also a of the ethereal cosmos into a vast multiplicity
of guardian deity of crops.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p314}**Syamatara** 299

**Svaraghosaraja**

**Svati**

Physician god. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Accounted among a series of
medicine *buddhas* Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA;* daughter or
SMAN-BLA *.* Typically depicted with stretched of DAKSA and wife of
CANDRA (SOMA). Also earlobes. Color: yellowish red.

Nistya.

**Svarozic**

**Syamatara**

*(the "black Tara")*

Sun god. Slav. Also the giver of fire and the smith Goddess.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. A gracious god, and further linked with
marriage. Also Svarog.

form of the goddess TARA. Also an emanation of AMOGHASIDDHI and a form
of AVALOKITESVARA.

Color: black, possibly green. Attribute: blue **Svasthavesini**

*(entering a natural state)*

lotus.

Goddess. Hindu. One of terrifying appearance.

Color: scarlet. Attribute: drum. Three-eyed and three-headed.

[]{#index_split_006.html#p315}T

6

**Tabiti**

created and who is known as the great unity.

Goddess of fire. Scythian. Also the guardian deity During the Sung
Dynasty (AD 960-1279) he was of all animals. The Romans syncretized her
with elevated to the head of the ranks of astral gods the hearth goddess
VESTA.

and he is embodied in the Pole Star, otherwise identified in Chinese
mythology as the Purple Planet.

**Ta-Bitjet**

Scorpion goddess. Egyptian. In incantations against scorpion bite she is
identified as a consort of the **Tailtiu**

god HORUS. Her blood, which flowed when Horus Goddess. Celtic (Irish).
By tradition the consort ruptured her hymen, is considered to possess
mag-of Eochaid of the TUATHA DE DANANN, she is ical and remedial
properties against the poison.

the foster mother of the god LUG and associated with the *Lughnasad*
festival on August 1.

**Taditkara** *(lightning)* Goddess of light. Buddhist. Color: green.
Attrib-Taipan

utes: lightning in the form of a creeper. Also Snake god. Australian
aboriginal. His consorts Vidyddhara.

include the snake goddesses Mantya, Tuknampa and Uka. He is revered
mainly by tribal groups **T'ai Shan**

living on the western seaboard of the Cape York God. Chinese. The senior
deity in the heavenly peninsula in northern Queensland. Taipan has
ministries, he is the immediate controller of the the typical attributes
of many other Australian earth and mankind. Titled the "god of the
eastern snake gods, including the rainbow snake. He peak." Also Di Zang.

exercises judgment over life or death and possesses great wisdom, a
universal characteristic of serpents. He is able to kill or cure and is
the deity **T'ai Yi**

who originally fashioned the blood of living Primordial god. Chinese.
The spirit of the things during the Dreamtime. The imagery of universe
who was present before the cosmos was the snake god is closely linked
with aboriginal 300

[]{#index_split_006.html#p316}**Tam Kung** 301

shamanism and with the healing rituals of NINIGI on his descent from
heaven to earth. A *shamans*.

tutelary god of swordsmen and judoka artists.

*See also* FUTSU-NUSHI-NO-KAMI.

**Tai-Sui-Jing**

God of temporal time. Chinese. The apotheosis **Takkiraja**

of the planet Jupiter which orbits the sun in a God. Buddhist. A
*dikpala* or guardian of the twelve-year cycle.

southeastern quarter. Color: blue. Attributes: blue staff, jewel, lotus
staff, sword and trident. Also Vajrajvalanalarka and Vajrayaksa.

**Tajin**

Generic title for a group of rain gods. Totonac (Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. Worshiped by a mod-Takotsi Nakawe

*(our grandmother growth)*

ern tribe and believed to reside in the ruins of El Chthonic vegetation
goddess. Huichol Indian Tajin, a classic Veracruz site whence they
control (Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The earth and all plant the thunder
clouds.

life belong to her and she is regarded as the mother *See also* TLALOC.

of the gods, particularly of the fire god TATEVALI.

She is very old and is invoked to give the boon of
**Taka-Mi-Musubi-No-Kami**

longevity. Her sacred tree is a form of fig, the *(high august*

*salate.*

*producing wondrous deity)*

Primordial creator being. Shinto \[Japan\]. The **Taksaka**

second of the deities listed in the sacred *Kojiki* Snake god. Hindu
(Epic and Puranic). One of a text. He appeared in the Takama-No-Hara
(plain group of seven M

of high heaven) after A

AHANAGAS. Attributes: rosary,

ME-NO-MINAKA-NUSHI-

swastika and waterjar.

NO-KAMI. A remote and vaguely defined being, he was-born alone in the
cosmos and hides himself from mankind.

**Ta'lab**

Moon god. Pre-Islamic southern Arabian. He **Taka-Okami-No-Kami**

*(great producer of*

also has an oracular function.

*rain in the mountains)*

`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_007.html}

**

Rain god. Shinto \[Japan\]. Specifically the god of rain generated in
mountains. A god of fierce rain, **Tam Kung**

also known as the "god of the dividing of the Local sea god. Chinese. A
deity with control over waters."

rain and water and who extinguishes fires. His *See also*
KURA-OAKMI-NO-KAMI.

worship is restricted to a coastal region between Hong Kong and Macau.
According to tradition he was an eight-year-old boy emperor, the last of
**Take-Mika-Dzuchi-No-Kami**

the Sung Dynasty, who committed suicide by God of thunder. Shinto
\[Japan\]. One of the RAI-jumping over a cliff in the face of Kublai
Khan's JIN gods of thunder, storms and rain, he is also advance in AD
1276. His attendant is Ho Wang, one of the warrior deities who guarded
Prince who joined him in death. A sanctuary in Coloane

[]{#index_split_007.html#p317}302 **Tama-No-Ya** Town in Macau, sited at
the end of a narrow boat-builders, his consort is the goddess
HINE-peninsula, is dedicated to him.

AHU-ONE and he is the father of HINE-ATA-UIRA Tam Kung is strongly
linked with the symbol-who descended to the underworld to become the ism
of dragons and the shrine contains a sacred goddess of death,
HINE-NUI-TE-PO. In other whale rib which is modeled into the shape of a
traditions he is the consort of Hine-Nui-Te-Po, dragon boat. The god is
normally depicted seated whom he joins each evening when he descends to
and holding a bell, which may be interpreted as an the underworld. It
was he who proposed that his instrument of warning or as a means of
calling parents should be pushed apart rather than attention to the
voices of the ancestors.

slaughtered. In Maori culture Tanemahuta, like all deities, is
represented only by inconspicuous, slightly worked stones or pieces of
wood and not **Tama-No-Ya**

by the large totems, which are depictions of God of jewelers. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The deity who ancestors. Also KANE (Hawaiian).

made a complete string of curved jewels nearly three meters long, one of
the lures which enticed the sun goddess AMATERASU from the cave where
**Tangaroa**

she hid herself.

Sea and creator god. Polynesian (including Maori).

The deity responsible for the oceans ( *moana*) and the fish ( *ika*)
within them. In Hawaiian belief **Tamats Palike Tamoyeke**

*(our eldest*

he was the primordial being who took the form *brother walking
everywhere).*

of a bird and laid an egg on the surface of the God of wind and air.
Huichol Indian (Mesoamer-primeval waters which, when it broke, formed
the ican) \[Mexico\]. The messenger of the gods, he earth and sky. He
then engendered the god of light, also put the world into its present
form and shape.

ATEA (cf. TANE). According to Tahitian legend, he fashioned the world
inside a gigantic mussel shell.

In a separate tradition Tangaroa went fishing **Tanara**

and hauled the Tongan group of islands from the Sky spirit. Yakut
\[central Siberia\]. The apotheo-depths of the ocean on a hook and line.
He is the sis of the sky.

progenitor of mankind (as distinct from TUMATAUENGA who has *authority*
over mankind).

His son Pili married SINA, the tropic bird and **Tana'ao**

they produced five children from whom the rest Weather and sea god.
Polynesian \[Marquesas of the Polynesian race was born. In Maori culture
Islands\]. A local variation on the Polynesian god Tangaroa, like all
deities, is represented only by TANGAROA, known as a god of winds and a
tute-inconspicuous, slightly worked stones or pieces of lary deity of
fishermen.

wood and not by the large totems which are depictions of ancestors.

**Tane(mahuta)**

God of light. Polynesian (including Maori). One **Tango**

of the children of the prime parents RANGINUI God. Polynesian \[Hervey
Islamds\] The third and PAPATUANUKU. Also god of trees, forests and
child of the primordial mother VARI-MA-TE-

[]{#index_split_007.html#p318}**Tara** 303

TAKERE, he was plucked from her right side and She is primarily a
guardian deity who defends lived in Enua-Kura, the land of the red
parrot against evil. A figure of the goddess was tradi-feather
immediately below the home of TINIRAU

tionally brought by a mother for the protection of in the world coconut.

a bride and she is closely connected with marriage, which involves
potential danger for the family with the introduction of an unknown
ele-Ta'ngwanla'na *(greatest one in the sea)* ment. The wedding ceremony
includes a ritual-Supreme sea god. Haida Indian \[Queen Char-ized
kidnapping of the bride. The figure is also lotte Island, Canada\]. His
home is said to be in placed in a doorway to ward off evil.

the deeps.

T'ao Hua Hsiennui is depicted in warlike posture wearing a skirt with
four black flags, each representing an army and bearing the character
**Tanit**

for wealth. She holds a sword by its scabbard end.

Moon goddess. Phoenician and Pontic (Carthagin-One of her cult centers,
the Temple of Jade Vacu-ian). Known largely from inscriptions at various
ity in Cheung Chan, holds a celebrated statue in sites along the North
African coast and linked with which she is depicted holding the scabbard
only.

the goddess ASTARTE. Her symbol is a triangular device with horizontal
bars supporting a moon disc.

Both deities are described as "ladies of the sanctu-Taoki-Ho-Oi-No-Kami

ary." Tanit was the supreme goddess at Carthage, God of carpenters.
Shinto \[Japan\]. One of the known as the "face of BAAL," until usurped
by the gods who built the beautiful sacred hall designed, Roman goddess
JUNO; she survived under the name in part, to lure the sun goddess
AMATERASU from CAELESTIS. The goddess CERES was also worshiped the cave
in which she hid herself.

in the TANIT temple at Carthage. Also Tenit.

*See also* HIKO-SASHIRI-NO-KAMI.

**Ta-No-Kami**

**Tapio**

Agricultural deity. Shinto \[Japan\]. A generic name Hunting god.
Pre-Christian Finnish. Believed to for several gods of crops and
harvests. May also be inhabit forests and invoked before a hunt.

identified as a mountain *KAMI.*

**Tanu'ta**

**Tar**

Earth spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\]. A Chthonic earth god. Tiv
\[Nigeria, West Africa\].

guardian of the earth and its plants and animals, Engendered by the
creator god AONDO, Tar is Tanu'ta is the consort of YINE'ANE'UT (in
other depicted as a prostrate figure with his head toward legends she is
married to the son of the supreme the east, comparable with the Egyptian
god GEB.

being TA'YAN).

**Tara**

*(power of hunger)*

**T'ao Hua Hsiennui**

*(peach blossom girl)*

1\. Goddess. Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic).

Goddess. Chinese. The spirit of the peach blos-May originally have had
astral connotations, since som and the deity of the second spring month.

the word can be interpreted as "star." One of a

[]{#index_split_007.html#p319}304 **Taranis** group of MAHAVIDYAS
personifying the SAKTI of **Taru**

SˇIVA. She may also be the consort of CANDRA Weather god. Hittite and
Hurrian. Known (SOMA). Aspects include Krodharatri. Attributes: from
inscriptions and equating with ISˇKUR.

knife, skin, skull, snakes and sword. Three-eyed.

Probably of Hurrian origin.

2\. Goddess.

Buddhist

(Mahayana

and

*See also* TARHUNT; TELEPINU.

Vajrayana). An epithet of the mother of the BUDDHA, Maya. Also one of a
series of female deities, the DHYANIBUDDHASAKTI considered to be aspects
**Tarvos Trigaranos**

of the Sakti of AVALOKITESVARA or of AMO-Bull god. Romano-Celtic
(Gallic). Known GASHIDDHI. She may also be the Sakti of ADIBID-chiefly
from a four-sided monument erected DHA and of the various DHYANIBUDDHAS
*,* in which near Paris by boatmen of the Seine during the case she is
characterized by their colors. These reign of the emperor Tiberius. It
depicts ESUS, Taras thus become "White Tara" and so on.

VULCANUS, JUPITER and Tarvos. As Tarvos Tri-See also BHRKUTI, EKAJATA,
KURUKULLA, garanos, he is drawn as a bull with three cranes SITATARA and
SYAMATARA. In Tibetan Buddhism on its back and can be seen at such
places as she is known as sGrol-ma.

Dorchester in England. The bull may alternatively bear three horns.

**Taranis**

Thunder god. Romano-Celtic (Gallic). Known **Tasenetnofret**

only from limited inscriptions, but may emulate Goddess. Egyptian. The
consort of HORUS as the Germanic god DONAR and is possibly the HAROERIS
and regarded as a minor emanation of same as Taranucos. The Romans
equated him the goddess HATHOR. Known from the sanctuary with JUPITER
and a Jupiter Tanarus inscription at of Kom-Ombo.

Chester in England may refer to Taranis. His symbol is a spoked wheel
and he is presumed to be the object of savage rites. The modern Breton
**Tasˇmetu(m)**

word for thunder is *taran.* Also Taranos.

Goddess. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian).

The consort of the god NABU.

**Tarhunt**

Weather god. Hurrian (Anatolian). Known from **Tasˇmisˇu**

inscriptions as the father of TELEPINU.

Attendant god. Hittite and Hurrian. The sibling of the weather god
TESˇUB.

**Tari Pennu**

Chthonic goddess. Indian (Khond). Created by **Tate**

the sky gods BOORA PENNU and BELLA PENNU

Creator god. Sioux \[USA\]. He appears in the so as to conceive the rest
of the pantheon. She clouds, his voice is the wind and he controls the
is identified as a malevolent deity, the subject of changing of the
seasons. He is also the guide of regular propitiation human sacrifices
in the the spirits of the dead. He is the deity with whom notorious
*meriah* rituals in Orissa province.

the Sioux *shamans* intercede.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p320}**Tatosi** 305

**Tate Hautse Kupuri**

*(mother north water).*

guards it. In human form the night sky with its Rain and water goddess.
Huichol Indian stars are her dress.

(Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Similar to TATE

KYEWIMOKA, but also responsible for mists and fogs.

**Tatenen**

*(exalted earth)*

Chthonic god. Egyptian. Originates as a vegetation god from Memphis, the
apotheosis of the Nile silt **Tate Kyewimoka**

*(mother west water)*

which appears after the inundation has subsided.

Rain and water goddess. Huichol Indian As a vegetation god, he is
depicted anthropomor-

(Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Appears in lightning phically with green face
and limbs and wearing a and is said to resemble a red snake. She lives
in a crown with plumes subtended by ram's horns. By deep gorge with
caves, in Santa Catarina, and the time of the Old Kingdom
(twenty-seventh to brings the rain from the west. Her animals
twenty-second centuries BC) he is recognized as an include deer and
ravens and she is also the god-emanation of the god PTAH, involved in
the cre-dess of the corn.

ation process and mentioned on the Shabaka Stone (Memphis), where he is
described as "father of the gods" and is perceived as an androgynous
being.

**Tate Naaliwahi**

He also protects the royal dead.

*(mother east water)*

Rain and water goddess. Huichol Indian (Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].
Appears in lightning **Tatevali**

*(our grandfather)*

and brings rain from the east. She lives in a deep God of fire. Huichol
Indian (Mesoamerican) gorge with caves, in Santa Catarina.

\[Mexico\]. Also a deity of life and health, perceived as a *shaman* who
prophesies and cures disease. He is the tutelary god of *shamans* and is
said to have **Tate Oteganaka**

*(mother corn)*

built the first Huichol temple with the god Corn goddess. Huichol Indian
(Mesoamerican) TATOSI. His animals include the macaw, royal

\[Mexico\]. The mother of the sun god TAYAU.

eagle, cardinal bird, puma and opossum.

**Tate Rapawiyema**

*(mother south water)*

**Tathatavasita** *(control of the such-ness)* Rain and water goddess.
Huichol Indian (Meso-Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group of
american) \[Mexico\]. Similar to TATE KYEWIMOKA, VASITAS personifying
the disciplines of spiritual but also the patron goddess of Laguna de
Mag-regeneration. Color: white. Attribute: white lotus.

dalena, where she is believed to take the form of a water lizard.

**Tatosi**

*(great grandfather deer tail)* God of fire. Huichol Indian
(Mesoamerican) **Tate Velika Vimali**

\[Mexico\]. A deity regarded as the son of TATEVALI, Sun goddess.
Huichol Indian (Mesoamerican) having been created from the plumes of his
father,

\[Mexico\]. Perceived as a young girl or as a royal but also the chief
god of deer. His sacred animal eagle who holds the world in her talons
and is the white-tailed hawk. Also Mara Kwari.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p321}306 **Tatqa'hicnin** **Tatqa'hicnin**

*(root man)*

intended to frighten off malignant forces before Vegetation spirit.
Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

and during childbirth. Taweret often holds the A vaguely defined being
who is chthonic and lives SA symbol of protection clasped over her
vulva.

under the ground, presumably controlling edible Talismanic vases are
fashioned in the shape of the roots and their availability.

goddess, with holes at the nipples through which milk could be poured
during rites.

Her benign nature contrasts with that of SETH, **Taumata-Atua**

often depicted as a male hippopotamus, an animal Vegetation god.
Polynesian (including Maori).

whose destructive behavior in the river and adja-He presides over the
fields and may be the cent fields was well known.

god Rongomatane under an alternative name. In Maori culture
Taumata-Atua, like all deities, is represented only by inconspicuous,
slightly **Tawhaki**

worked stones or pieces of wood and not by the Heroic god. Polynesian
and Maori. A descendant large totems, which are depictions of ancestors.

of the creator god Rehua and grandson of Whati-tiri, the goddess of
thunder, Tawhaki is the third child of Hema and Urutonga. He is the
younger **Tawa**

sibling of the goddess Pupu-mai-nono and the Creator god. Pueblo Indian
\[USA\]. The apothe-god Karihi. In some Polynesian traditions osis of
the sun and father of the tribe.

Tawhaki is thought of as a mortal ancestor whose consort was the goddess
Tangotango on whom he fathered a daughter, Arahuta. Tawhaki's father
**TAWERET**

*(the great one)*

was killed during tribal warfare with a mythical **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
Goddess of childbirth.

clan known as the Ponaturi and he himself was **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** probably circa 2500

the subject of jealous rivalry concerning the god-BC until the end of
Egyptian history circa AD

dess Hine-Piripiri. During this time attempts 400.

were made to kill him. He fathered children by **SYNONYMS** Thoueris
(Greek).

Hine-Piripiri, including Wahieroa, who is gener-CENTER(S) OF CULT no
obvious cult centers, but ally perceived as being embodied in comets.

represented in the Karnak complex at Thebes.

**ART REFERENCES** a favorite subject for amulets and perforated vases.

**Tawhirimatea**

**LITERARY SOURCES** generally in texts including God of winds.
Polynesian (including Maori). One magical spells.

of the children of the prime parents RANGINUI and PAPATUANUKU. He was
uniquely opposed to the Taweret is a goddess who enjoyed popularity
separation of his mother and father, sky and earth, among rank-and-file
Egyptians and whose pro-at the time of the creation of the cosmos, and
in tection was sought particularly by women in consequence spends his
time harassing and trou-pregnancy. She is depicted either in human form
bling mankind. In Maori culture Papatuanuku, like or as a hybrid with
the head of a hippopotamus, all deities, is represented only by
inconspicuous, human breasts and swollen belly, leonine limbs slightly
worked stones or pieces of wood and not by and a crocodile tail. This
unusual aspect is the large totems, which are depictions of ancestors.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p322}**Tecciztecatl** 307

**Ta'xet**

**Te-Manava-Roa**

*(long-lived)*

God of death. Haida Indian \[Queen Charlotte Creator being. Polynesian
\[Hervey Islands\]. Per-Island, Canada\]. The deity responsible for
those ceived in the form of a giant worm, this being is who die
violently.

one of three spirits which govern and ensure the *See also* TIA.

permanence of the universe. He lives in the highest part of the root of
the coconut shell which represents the world.

**Ta'yan**

Supreme being. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

An indefinite character living somewhere in the **Te Kore**

*(the void)*

zenith and generally out of touch with ordinary Primordial being.
Polynesian (including Maori).

mortals. His consort is Supervisor Woman, Lap-The personification of the
darkness of chaos na'ut and his son is Cloud Man, YA'HALAN. He before
light came into being. Usually coupled conducts business with the
physical earth through with TE PO, the unknown night.

his majordomo Big Raven, QUIKINNA'QU.

*See also* TENANTO'MWAN.

**Te Po**

Primordial being. Polynesian (including Maori).

**Tayau**

*(father sun)*

The personification of the night which existed in Sun god. Huichol
Indian (Mesoamerican) \[Mex-chaos before the creation of light. Usually
cou-ico\]. According to tradition, he was created by pled with TE KORE,
the void.

the ancient *shamans*, who threw the youthful son of the corn mother
TATE OTEGANAKA into an oven in full ceremonial attire. He traveled
under-Te-Tanga-Engae *(breathing)* ground and emerged in the east as the
sun. In Creator being. Polynesian \[Hervey Islands\]. Per-late May, the
Huichol sacrifice a sheep and a ceived in the form of a giant worm, this
being is turkey in a ritual fire, after which they sing all one of three
spirits which govern and ensure the night until sunrise. Also Tau;
Taverik.

permanence of the universe. He lives in the middle part of the root of
the coconut shell which **Tayau Sakaimoka**

represents the world.

Sun god. Huichol Indian (Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The deity of the
setting sun in the west, regarded as the assistant of T

**Tecciztecatl**

AYAU.

*(conch shell lord)*

Moon god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. In cosmogony, when
on the fifth day of cre-Te-Aka-la-Roe

*(root of all existence)*

ation the gods sat in judgment to elect the new Creator being.
Polynesian \[Hervey Islands\]. Per-sun god, NANAHUATL and Tecciztecatl
cremated ceived in the form of a giant worm, this being is themselves in
the sacred fire. The heart of one of three spirits which govern and
ensure the Nanahuatl ascended to become the new sun and permanence of
the universe. He lives in the low-that of Tecciztecatl became the moon.
Tradition est part of the root of the coconut shell which suggests that
Nanahuatl is diseased and impover-represents the world.

ished but of great courage, while Tecciztecatl is

[]{#index_split_007.html#p323}308 **Tefnut**

wealthy and a coward. Alternatively, the pair are **Teisbas**

sons of QUETZALCOATL and of TLALOC and were Tutelary god. Urartian
\[Armenia\]. Known from hurled into the fire by their fathers. Also one
of inscriptions.

the group classed as the TEZCATLIPOCA complex.

**NOTE:** eventually all the gods sacrificed themselves for mankind.

**Tejosnisa**

*(sharp)*

God. Buddhist. Apparently connected with the guardian deities or
*dikpalas* in the southeastern **Tefnut**

quarter. Color: whitish red. Attribute: sun disc.

Primordial goddess of moisture. Egyptian.

According to the genealogy laid down by the priests of Heliopolis,
Tefnut was created out of **TELEPINU**

the breath or spit of the creator sun god ATUM.

**ORIGIN** Hittite and Hurrian (Anatolia) \[Turkey\].

She is the sister of SˇU, god of the air, and the Vegetation and
fertility god.

mother of GEB and NUT. Her main cult sanctu-KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP
circa 1800 BC or ary was at Heliopolis. Tefnut, like Sˇu, can become
earlier until 1100 BC or later.

one of several manifestations of the "eye of RE" in **SYNONYMS**
Telipuna.

which case she appears as a lion, or in human **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
associated with at least four form but with a leonine head. According to
the cities in the Turus region, including Nerik, but Pyramid Texts, she
creates pure water from her also known down into the Syrian plain.

vagina. In a different context she takes the form of **ART REFERENCES**
seals and seal impressions; a snake encircling a scepter.

sculptures; monumental rock carvings.

**LITERARY SOURCES** texts from Boghazkoy, etc.

**Tegid Foel**

Telepinu is a fertility god, the son of TESˇUB or, Water goddess. Celtic
(Welsh). One of a pair with in alternative tradition, TARU, who brings
thun-CERIDWEN, identified by the poet Taliesin.

der, lightning and rain. He may be of Hurrian origin. He goes missing
and is rediscovered to symbolize the annual demise and restoration of
**Teharon(hiawagon)**

*(he who holds heaven*

nature.

*in his hands)*

The story of his disappearance is told in several Creator god. Mohawk
Indian \[USA and Canada\].

differing narratives, and his role is sometimes He engendered the world
and all living things taken by the weather god Tesˇub. Essentially the
and is invoked by *shamans* to provide good health legend describes how
Telepinu departs from the and prosperity. His adversary is the demonic
fig-Hittite kingdom in a rage with boots on the ure Tawiskaron,
symbolizing darkness.

wrong feet. The sun god gives a feast for the thousand gods of Hatti,
but is unable to feed all the guests because there is not enough food in
**Teicauhtzin**

*(younger brother)*

the land. First an eagle, then Tesˇub himself, go Minor god of war.
Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) out to search. Finally the goddess
HANNAHANNAS

\[Mexico\]. A patron god of Mexico and one of the sends a bee which
finds and stings the sleeping group classed as the HUITZILPOCHTLI
complex.

Telepinu, provoking still further rage in nature

[]{#index_split_007.html#p324}**Terra Mater** 309

(the Finnish legend of the hero Lemminkainen which was then transformed
into its present state tells a comparable story). Telepinu eventually by
the raven-like majordomo KU'URKIL.

returns home, calmed, and nature returns to prosperity.

The god may have received a form of tree wor-Tenanto'mwan

ship in which a hollow trunk was filled with har-Creator spirit. Koryak
\[southeastern Siberia\].

vest offerings.

Identified particularly with the reindeer-hunting Koryak on the Taigonos
peninsula. An indefinite and remote character living somewhere in the
**Teliko**

zenith of the sky. He created the world which was God of hot winds.
Bambara \[Mali, West Africa\].

then transformed into its present state by According to tradition the
water god FARO chal-QUIKINNA'QU. Tenanto'mwan is the name always lenged
him in a primordial struggle and smashed used when addressing the
creator in incantations.

him against a mountain.

*See also* YA'QHICNIN.

**Teljavelik**

**Tepeyollotl** *(hill heart)* Creator god. Pre-Christian Lithuanian. He
Minor chthonic or earth god. Aztec (classical engendered the sun god
SAULE and is described as Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group the
heavenly smith.

classed as the TEZCATLIPOCA complex. He was originally an earthquake
god, symbolized by the jaguar and later adopted into the Aztec pantheon.

**Tellus**

Chthonic primordial earth mother. Roman. A corn deity, generally
regarded as benevolent, but **Tepoztecatl**

also a goddess of the dead. Enemy armies were Minor fertility god. Aztec
(classical Mesoameri-offered to her and cursed in her name. Both she
can) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the and the corn goddess
CERES were propitiated Ometochtli complex concerned with the maguey with
human sacrifice. Also TERRA MATER.

plant and the brewing of the alcoholic drink pulque.

**Telpochtli** *(male youth)* Omnipotent god. Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) **Terminus**

\[Mexico\]. A universal and generally malevolent God of passage. Roman.
Embodied in boundary power. One of the group classed as the TEZ-marker
stones. He was celebrated in the *Termi-CATLIPOCA complex.*

*nalia* festival on February 23.

**Tenanto'mni**

**Terra Mater**

Creator spirit. Chukchee (eastern Siberia\]. An Chthonic primordial
earth mother. Roman.

indefinite and remote character living somewhere Derived from Greek
model.

in the zenith of the sky. He created the world *See also* TELLUS.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p325}310 **TESUB**

**TESUB**

statuettes of the god have been discovered at **ORIGIN** Hittite and
Hurrian (Anatolia) \[Turkey\].

Mycenae, Tiryns, Phylakopi and Delos.

Weather god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 1800 BC or earlier until circa 1100 BC
or later.

**Teteo Innan Teteo**

*(gods their mother)*

**SYNONYMS** TESˇUP and possibly SˇUTEKH.

Minor god of fire. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Hattusas (Boghazköy);

\[Mexico\]. A paternalistic deity associated with Arinna; many other
sanctuaries in the Taurus fire. One of the group classed as the
XIUHTE-region and northern Syrian plain.

CUHTLI complex.

**ART REFERENCES** seals and seal impressions; sculpture; rock carving.

**LITERARY SOURCES** cuneiform and hieroglyphic **Teteoinnan**

texts from Boghazköy and elsewhere.

Goddess of curers and medical diviners. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)
\[Mexico\]. The head of Tesˇub is the most important deity in Hittite
state the group classed as the Teteoinnan complex.

religion, although he may be subservient to the Sun God(dess) of ARINNA.
Principally a weather god, as befits a mountainous region experiencing
**Teteoinnan-Toci**

frequent storms and otherwise changeable cli-Goddess of midwives. Aztec
(classical Mesoamer-mate. Also a god of battle and "king of heaven,
ican) \[Mexico\]. Known locally in the Valley lord of the land of
Hatti." His consort is generally of Mexico and invoked by women in
childbirth.

identified as HEBAT. According to legend, Tesˇub One of the group
classed as the TETEOINNAN

is involved in a typical confrontation battle with complex.

the forces of disorder in the form of a dragon, Illuyankas. He defeats
the dragon, thus symbolizing the re-invigoration of the earth after
winter **Tethys**

and the triumph of life over death. The drama Sea goddess. Greek. One of
the TITANS, the seems to have been enacted in a New Year spring daughter
of OURANOS and GAIA and both the festival of Purulliyas.

sister and the consort of OKEANOS.

The king of the Hittite kingdom was Tesˇub's high priest. A fragmented
document describes a ritual in which the statue of the god is taken, in
**Tetzahauteotl**

*(god of fearful omen)*

company with temple prostitutes, to a Tarnu (cul-Minor god of war. Aztec
(classical Mesoameri-tic or bath) house in a sacred grove where various
can) \[Mexico\]. A patron god of Mexico and rites are performed over it.
Tesˇub sometimes one of the group classed as the HUITZILPOCHTLI plays
the role of the missing vegetation god (see complex.

TELEPINU). Sculptures at Malatya identify ram sacrifices. Tesˇub is
depicted holding a bow and standing on a horned animal or in a chariot
drawn **Tetzahuitl**

*(fearful omen)*

by bulls.

Minor god of war. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Tesˇub was imported
into Greece during the

\[Mexico\]. A patron god of Mexico and one of the Mycenaean period
(circa 1500-1200 BC). Bronze group classed as the HUITZILPOCHTLI
complex.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p326}**TEZCATLIPOCA** 311

**Teuhcatl**

*(he of Teutlan)*

**ART REFERENCES** stone sculptures; murals; codex Local god of war.
Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) illustrations.

\[Mexico\]. Also a hunting god and one of the **LITERARY SOURCES**
pre-Columbian codices.

group classed as the Mixcoatl complex.

According to creation mythology, the great mother in the thirteenth
heaven became preg-Teutates

nant and the 400 star gods who were jealous of Local tribal deity.
Romano-Celtic (Gallic).

her child plotted to destroy it at birth. They were Known only from
limited inscriptions. Teutates restrained in a cavern, however, until
the moment may be less the name of a deity than an epithet when
Tezcatlipoca emerged, fully armed, from meaning "great." According to
the Roman writer his mother and destroyed his enemies. His only Lucan,
he is one of three Celtic gods encoun-ally was his sister COYOLXAUHQUI,
who was lost tered by Caesar's army in Gaul and the object of in the
battle and whose head the god hurled into savage rites in which victims
were drowned in the heavens to live there as the moon. Alternative
sacrificial lakes. He may equate with a British god, tradition describes
Tezcatlipoca as the product of Totatis. He becomes assimilated variously
to the self-created primordial beings TONACATE-Mercury or MARS. Also
Teutatis.

CUHTLI and TONACACIHUATL.

He presides over the first of the five world ages personified by the sun
4 OCELOTL. He is also the **Tewi'xilak**

ruler of the tenth of the thirteen heavens known God of goat-hunters.
Dza'wadeenox Indian at the time of the Spanish conquest, Teotl Iztacan

\[British Columbia, Canada\]. The eldest son (the place of the white
god).

of the supreme god QA'WADILIQALA. Said to Tezcatlipoca and QUETZALCOATL
are, in some kill goats with great ease and feed the tribe.

contexts, antagonists, but alternatively they work Attributes include a
head band of red cedar together to restore the shattered universe and
bark.

initiate the fifth (present) sun. Tezcatlipoca transformed himself into
an *avatara* MIXCOATL-CAMAXTLI, the "red Tezcatlipoca" (also said to
**Tezcacoac Ayopechtli**

*(mirror serpent*

be his son), to create fire. He is also the great *tortoise bench)*

magician who dragged the earth mother from Birth goddess. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) the primordial waters in the form of a huge

\[Mexico\]. An aspect of XOCHIQUETZAL. One of alligator, CIPACTLI. In
the struggle she bit off the group classed as the TETEOINNAN complex.

his left foot, but to prevent her from sinking back into the waters of
creation he tore out her lower jaw.

**TEZCATLIPOCA** *(smoking mirror)* Tezcatlipoca is the patron deity of
young war-ORIGIN Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

riors and is capable of excesses of cruelty. A sac-Sun god.

rificial victim was chosen annually and killed by **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 750 to having his heart torn out.

AD 1500, but probably much earlier.

The god is perceived in various aspects and col-SYNONYMS Moyocoya.

ors, according to the position of the sun. In the **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
none.

east he is yellow or white, in the south blue (see

[]{#index_split_007.html#p327}312 **Tezcatlipoca-Itztlacoliuhqui** also
HUITZILPOCHTLI), in the west red and in the **Thatmanitu**

north black.

Local goddess of healing. Western Semitic. Recognized chiefly at Sidon,
but also included in the Ugaritic pantheon.

**Tezcatlipoca-Itztlacoliuhqui** Temple deity. Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. One of four described in the codices **Thea**

*Borgia, Cospi* and *Fejervary-Mayer.*

Goddess. Greek. One of the TITANS, consort of *See also* TONATIUH,
CENTEOCIHUATL and HYPERION and mother of the sun god HELIOS

MICTLANTECUHTLI.

and of the goddesses EOS (dawn) and SELENE

(moon). Also Theia.

**Tezcatzoncatl**

Minor fertility god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) **Theandros**

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the Ome-God. Pre-Islamic
northern Arabian. Known only tochtli complex concerned with the maguey
plant from Greek and Roman inscriptions.

and the brewing of the alcoholic drink pulque.

**Thab-Iha**

**Themis**

Hearth god. Bon (pre-Lamaist) \[Tibet\]. Color: Goddess of justice and
order. Greco-Roman. A red. Attribute: a snake in the form of a noose.

daughter of the sky god OURANOS and earth mother GAIA, though not
classed as one of the Titans. A consort of ZEUS and the mother of
**Thakur Deo**

the *Horae* and *Moires.* She is the impartial deity Local god. Hindu.
Known from various villages who sits blindfolded in Hades and judges the
in northern India. His consort is D

souls of the dead to determine whether they will HARTI MATA.

May appear with a white horse. Also Thakkur.

pass to the Elysian fields or to the fires of Tartarus. Attended by
three lesser judgment deities, AEACOS, MINOS and RHADAMANTHOS.

**Thalna**

The guilty are handed over to the Furies---the Goddess of childbirth.
Etruscan. Depicted as a Dirae, Erinyes or Eumenides. At Rhamnus in
youthful woman, often associated with the sky Attica, Themis was
accorded a sanctuary built god T

in the sixth century

IN.

BC beside which that of

NEMESIS, goddess of indignation, was built in the fifth century.

**Thanatos**

Minor god of death. Greek. According to legend, he is one of the two
sons of NYX, the goddess of **Thesan**

night, and lives in a remote cave beside the river Goddess of the dawn.
Etruscan. Also invoked at Lethe which he shares with his twin brother
childbirth, since she brings new life into the world HYPNOS, god of
sleep.

each day with her light.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p328}**THOTH** 313

**Thetis**

champion wearing iron gloves and a girdle of Goddess of rivers and
oceans. Greek. One of the might, and wielding a short-handled hammer,
daughters of NEREUS, Thetis takes responsibility, Mjollnir, which
creates lightning when struck with OKEANOS, for the oceans and rivers.
She is against stone and becomes a thunderbolt when among the lesser
known deities; according to thrown. He may also carry an ax and both may
mythology she is a mermaid, but she is particu-represent fertility
symbols. The swastika, thought larly significant as the mother of
Achilles by an to derive from the ax, becomes associated with unnamed
mortal. According to legend she him and he may be further symbolized by
a sacred attempted to render him immortal by immersing gold or silver
arm-ring.

him in the waters of the Styx. She failed because Thor possesses a
prodigious appetite for food the heel by which she held him had remained
dry.

and drink. He rides the heavens in a chariot His education she entrusted
to the centaur Chi-drawn by two goats, Tanngniost and Tanngrisnir, ron.
She was surrounded by attendant sea crea-whose wheels cause the sound of
the thunder. He tures known as Nereids and after Achilles's death is
strongly linked with trees and sacred groves.

she returned to the ocean depths.

The name Thor is the origin of Thursday.

**THOR**

*(thunder god)*

**THOTH**

**ORIGIN** Nordic (Icelandic). Primarily god of war **ORIGIN** Egyptian.
God of the moon and of but also a deity of the sky, storms, sea journeys
wisdom.

and the administration of justice.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 3000 BC until **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** Viking period circa the end of Egyptian history circa AD 400.

AD 700 and earlier, until well into the Christian **SYNONYMS** Djeheuty
(archaic).

era, probably until AD 1100 or later.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Khemnu \[el-Ashmunein\] or **SYNONYMS** HORAGALLES
(Lappish); Thunor Hermopolis (Greek). Also in the Sinai, in
(Anglo-Saxon).

Nubia and in the Dakhleh oasis in the western **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Uppsala (Sweden); Dublin desert.

(Ireland); many others throughout the Nordic **ART REFERENCES**
sculpture; stone reliefs; wall region.

paintings, etc.

**ART REFERENCES** small sculptures and reliefs; **LITERARY SOURCES**
Pyramid Texts; coffin texts, probably the subject of other anonymous
etc.

carvings.

`</i>`{=html}

***LITERARY SOURCES** Icelandic codices; *Prose* Thoth is the patron
deity of scribes and of knowl-Edda* (Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo);
votive edge, including scientific, medical and mathe-inscriptions; place
names.

matic writing, and is said to have given mankind the art of hieroglyphic
writing. He is important as Thor is one of the more important AESIR sky
gods a mediator and counselor among the gods and is in Norse religion,
the chief defender of the realms the scribe of the Heliopolis ENNEAD
pantheon.

of Asgard. His mother is said to be lord, the *prima* Thoth is described
in some inscriptions as a son *materia* of earth, and he lives in the
hall Bilskirnir.

of RE, but according to mythology he was born He probably achieved
greater popularity than from the head of the god SETH. He may be OTHIN.
Described as a massive red-bearded depicted in human form with the head
of an ibis,

[]{#index_split_007.html#p329}314 **Thuremlin** wholly as an ibis, or as
a seated baboon some-LITERARY SOURCES cuneiform texts, particularly
times with its torso covered in feathers. His the creation epic *Enuma
Elisˇ.*

attributes include a crown which consists of a crescent moon surmounted
by a moon disc.

Tiamat is the power of the ocean waters and is Thoth is generally
regarded as a benign deity.

intimately involved with the Babylonian creation He is also scrupulously
fair and is responsible not story. She combines with the underground
fresh only for entering in the record the souls who pass waters of APSU
to give birth to eleven monstrous to the afterlife, but of ajudicating
in the Hall of the beings and is said to have been enraged by the Two
Truths. The Pyramid Texts reveal a violent death of Apsu at the hands of
ENKI and at the side of his nature by which he decapitates the behest of
a group of gods headed by MARDUK. In adversaries of truth and wrenches
out their hearts.

revenge she forms other deities in the primordial cosmos into a rival
group and chooses, as her second consort, the minor god Kingu to lead
her **Thuremlin**

army against Marduk. Marduk ultimately splits God of passage.
Australasia. Local deity of several her in two, making the vault of
heaven out of one tribes in New South Wales. Said to oversee the half,
using her eyes as the sources of the Tigris transition from adolescence
to manhood. The ini-and Euphrates, and heaping the mountains over tiate
was taken away by the god, "killed," restored her head.

to life and endured a tooth being knocked out to signify the arrival of
adulthood and full incorpora-tion into the society of the tribe. Also
Daramulun.

**Tiberinus**

River god. Roman. The deity of the river Tiber.

His consort is one of the Vestal Virgins sacrificed **Tia**

*(death by violence)*

by drowning. His sanctuary was built on an island God of death. Haida
Indian \[Queen Charlotte in the river and, until some time during the
Island, Canada\]. Those who are about to die a Republican period, all
bridges across the river violent death are said to hear him groaning
about were made wholly of wood so as not to offend the camp and see him
as a headless corpse with him. The adverse connotations of iron are
unclear, blood flowing endlessly from his severed neck.

but its use was forbidden by official decree.

He flies through the air.

*See also* TA'XET.

**Tien Mu**

Goddess of lightning. Chinese. She is said to flash **TIAMAT**

her mirror at an intended victim of the god LEI **ORIGIN** Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian) KUNG'S thunderbolts to ensure his aim.

\[Iraq\]. Primordial creator goddess.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 2000 BC until circa 200 BC.

**T'ien Tsun**

*(heavenly and honored)*

**SYNONYMS** none.

Generic title of gods. Taoist (Chinese). The name **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Babylon.

given to each of the three holy images in a Taoist **ART REFERENCES**
plaques, votive stelae; glyptics, temple: the "perfect holy one," the
"highest holy etc.

one" and the "greatest holy one." Also Tian-zhu.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p330}**TIN HAU** 315

**Tienoltsodi**

quarter. Color: sky green (possibly meaning God of oceans and fresh
water. Navaho \[USA\].

"overcast"). Attributes: book and sword.

He controls the waters which have fallen on earth, as distinct from
those in the heavens, which are ruled by the rain god TONENILI.

**Tilla**

Bull god. Hittite and Hurrian. The attendant and vehicle of the weather
god TESˇUB.

**Tifenua**

*(lord of the land)*

Chthonic fertility god. Polynesian \[Tikopia\]. He **Timaiti-Ngava
Ringavari** *(soft-bodied)* is linked with the sea god FAIVARONGO and
with Primordial being. Polynesian \[Hervey Islands\].

the sky god ATUA I KAFIKA. His father is Pusiu-The female principle
which, with T

raura, a powerful deity personified by the reef eel, IMATEKORE,

engendered the earth mother P

and his mother is one of the Sa-Nguti-Te-Moana.

APATUANUKU.

Also Pu-I-Te-Moana.

**Timatekore** ( *nothing more*) Primordial being. Polynesian \[Hervey
Islands\].

**Ti'hmar**

The male principle which, with TIMAITI-NGAVA Supreme god. Kolyma Tungus
\[Siberia\]. The RINGAVARI, engendered the earth mother PAPAT-name by
which the Christian god was still UANUKU.

addressed after local culture was influenced by Russian Orthodoxy.

**Tin**

Sky god. Etruscan. His attribute is a bunch of **Tiki**

lightning flashes and he may appear in association Creator god.
Polynesian (including Maori). One with THALNA, goddess of birth. In
Roman culture of the children of RANGINUI and PAPATUANUKU

he becomes syncretized with JUPITER.

who created mankind. In some Polynesian traditions he is represented as
the first man, akin to Adam. The word is also incorporated in *tiki-TIN
HAU*

*(queen of heaven)*

*wananga* or "god stick," which describes the **ORIGIN** Taoist
(Chinese). Goddess of waters.

wooden or stone images of deities that are usually **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa AD 1300 until minimally worked and stand about 19.5
inches present.

tall. Only thirty or so examples of these are **SYNONYMS** Lin Ma-Tzu;
Ma-Niang; Ma-Tzu.

known, most having been destroyed by Christian **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Hangchow and throughout missions. The celebrated large Maori totems are
Chinese culture.

depictions of ancestors who appear as human/bird **ART REFERENCES**
paintings and sculptures.

or reptile hybrids. Also Ki'i (Hawaiian).

**LITERARY SOURCES** various philosophical and religious texts, mostly
inadequately researched and as yet untranslated.

**Tiksnosnisa**

*(hot and sharp)*

God. Buddhist. Apparently connected with the Tin Hau originates as a
mortal born on the island guardian deities or *dikpalas* in the
northwestern of Mei-Chou in the Fukien province of China,

[]{#index_split_007.html#p331}316 **Tinirau** the daughter of a minor
official. She died at the **Tir**

age of twenty-eight, having perfected herself and God of wisdom.
Pre-Christian Armenian. Also having experienced recurrent dreams of
saving concerned with writing and revered as an oracle.

fishing boats from the waters close to her village.

This tradition was inscribed on the walls of a sanctuary in Hangchow in
AD 1228.

**Tirawa**

Tin Hau was deified in 1278 by the Mongol Creator god. Pawnee Indian
\[USA\]. A remote emperor Kublai Khan, who introduced the title and
vaguely defined figure who is present in

"queen of heaven." The first of the Ch'ing the elements of wind and
storm. Lightning is emperors subsequently conferred on her the title the
flashing of his eye. He provides the tribe

"imperial consort." She was thus subordinate only with all their needs
and is invoked by the Pawnee to Yu Huang Shang Ti, the Jade Emperor.

*shamans*.

Tin Hau was first worshiped as a guardian goddess of boats and
fishermen, but her role was extended so that she became the deity of
oceans **Tirumal**

*(the excellent black one)*

and fresh waters. She is celebrated in a festival on Creator god. Early
Dravidian (Tamil). Thought the twenty-third day of the third month. In
art to reside in trees and equating with VISŇU. In she is frequently
depicted with two grotesque later Hinduism used as an epithet of Visňu.

attendant figures known as "Thousand League Eyes" and "Favoring Wind
Ears."

**Tisˇpak**

God. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akkadian). The **Tinirau** *(innumerable)*
tutelary deity of the city of Esňumma.

Fish god. Polynesian \[Hervey Islands\]. The second offspring of the
great mother VARI-MA-TE-TAKERE and the younger sibling of AVATEA. He is
**Titans**

said to live in the coconut of the world on a sacred A race of gods.
Greek. The secondary group of isle called Motu-Tapu immediately below
the deities in the pre-Hellenic pantheon, headed by home of Avatea and
to own ponds full of all kinds the sky god OURANOS and the earth mother
of fish. He is depicted as half man (right side) and GAIA. They have six
pairs of children: OKEANOS

half fish (left side) in the form of a sprat.

and TETHYS, KRONOS and RHEA, HYPERION and THEA, Koeos and Phoebe,
IAPETOS and Klymene, **Tinnit**

Kreos and Eurybe. According to legend the chil-Goddess. Pontic
(Carthaginian).

dren usurped their father but were eventually *See also* T

beaten by ZEUS, heading the major group of ANIT.

the pantheon, who hurled them into the abyss of Tartaros.

**Tino Taata**

Creator god. Polynesian \[Society Islands\]. Probably regarded as the
tutelary deity who engendered **Titlacahuan**

*(we his slaves)*

mankind and equating therefore to the more Ominoptent god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) widely recognized Polynesian god TANGAROA.

\[Mexico\]. A universal and generally malevolent

[]{#index_split_007.html#p332}**Tlalehitonatiuh** 317

power. One of the group classed as the TEZ-Tuesley in Surrey, England,
derive from the name CATLIPOCA complex.

of the god.

**TIWAZ**

*(derives from Indo-European word* **Ti'ykitiy**

*for god, dieus)*

Sun spirit. Yakut \[southeastern and central **ORIGIN** Germanic
(northwestern Europe). Chief Siberia\]. Often identified with the
supreme being sky god; god of war.

AYI'URU'N TOYO'N.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 500 BC and probably earlier until
Christianization circa AD

1100\.

**Ti'zil-Kutkhu**

**SYNONYMS** Tyr; Tiw or Tig (Anglo-Saxon); Guardian spirit. Kamchadal
\[southeastern Teiwa (archaic).

Siberia\]. One of the sons of the creator spirit **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
scattered forest sanctuaries.

KUTKHU, his consort is SI'DUKU and he is **ART REFERENCES** reliefs in
stone and metal.

considered to be the progenitor of the Kamchadal **LITERARY**

**SOURCES** runic inscriptions (see tribe.

Wodan).

Germanic war god and probably chief among **Tlacahuepan** *(human beam)*
their sky gods, one of two contenders on Minor god of war. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) which OTHIN may have been modeled in

\[Mexico\]. A patron god of Mexico and one of the Nordic (Icelandic)
culture. Classical writers group classed as the HUITZILPOCHTLI complex.

identified the Roman war god MARS with Tiwaz, thus for the third day of
the week we have *mardi* in French but Tuesday in English.

**Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli**

*(lord of the dawn)*

The runic symbol for Tiwaz is sometimes cut God of the morning star
(Venus). Aztec (classical on spears, presumably to offer talismanic
pro-Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. An incarnation or tection. Tiwaz
represents law and order and *avatara* of the god creator QUETZALCOATL
and appears as a more honest judiciary than Othin one of the group
classed as the Mixcoatl complex.

(see Othin).

The ruler of the twelfth of the thirteen heavens According to legend,
Tiwaz is a one-armed god, known at the time of the Spanish conquest,
Teotl having sacrificed his hand to the jaws of the wolf Tlatlauhcan
(the place of the red god). In other Fenrir so that it might be bound
up. This may traditions (described in codices *Borgia* and *Vati-have
been the origin of a practice by which, *canus B*) he is one of the four
gods supporting the according to Tacitus, the Germanic Semnones lowest
heaven at each cardinal point; he resides in tribe bound the hands and
feet of those entering the east.*

a woodland sanctuary, probably dedicated to Tiwaz. At Ragnarok (doom) it
is believed that Fenrir will break free and swallow the sun.

**Tlalehitonatiuh** *(on the earth sun)* According to Snorri ( *Prose
Edda*) the wolf Garm, Chthonic underworld god. Aztec (classical
Meso-possibly Fenrir by another name, kills Tiwaz in american)
\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the final battle of the gods.
Place names such as the MICTLANTECUHTLI complex.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p333}318 **TLALOC**

**TLALOC**

human figures. Wall paintings including a mural **ORIGIN** Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

depiction exist at Zacuala. At Tula, Hidalgo, Rain god.

Pyramid B used by the Toltecs includes human **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
mainly circa AD 750

sculptures known as *chacmools,* holding dishes to AD 1500, but probably
much earlier and still which are believed to have held human hearts
continuing among peasants in rural areas.

for Tlaloc.

**SYNONYMS** none.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Tenochtitlan, Teotihuacan, Tula, etc.

**Tlaloque-Tepictoton** *(the small molded* **ART REFERENCES** stone
sculptures; murals and *ones)*

codex illustrations.

Fertility and rain god. Aztec (classical Mesoamer-LITERARY SOURCES
pre-Columbian codices.

ican) \[Mexico\]. The personification of small, rain-bearing hills. One
of the group classed as the TLALOC complex.

One of the principal personalities in Aztec creation mythology, Tlaloc
was fashioned with the water goddess CHALCHIUHTLICUE. According to
**Tlaltecuhtli**

some traditions he is the father of the moon god Chthonic creator
goddess. Aztec (classical TECCIZTECATL, whom he sacrificed in the great
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. In Aztec cosmogony, fire to engender the moon.
He is also perceived as Tlaltecuhtli is a monstrous, toad-like figure
the ruler of the eighth of the thirteen heavens whose body is cleaved in
two by the gods TEZ-known at the time of the Spanish conquest, CATLIPOCA
and QUETZALCOATL to fashion heaven Ilhuicatl Xoxouhcan (the blue
heaven). He is a and earth. The ruler of the second of the thirteen
fertility god who created water and rain and heavens known at the time
of the Spanish con-presided over the third of the five world ages,
quest, Ilhuicatl Tlalocan Ipan Metztli (the heaven which he ended with a
great fiery rain. He has of the paradise of the rain god over the moon),
control over lightning. He is perceived in four she is also one of the
group classed as the MICT-forms---black, white, blue and red---but
typically LANTECUHTLI complex. She is said to swallow the blue with
"goggles" over the eyes and serpent sun each evening and disgorge it in
the dawn. She fangs. It has been suggested that he evolved from also
devours the blood and hearts of sacrificial a jaguar-type animistic
deity worshiped by the victims and the souls of the dead.

Olmecs. He was propitiated to bring rain at the *See also* CIPACTLI.

end of the dry season by sacrificing large numbers of small children on
mountain altars.

At Tenochtitlan, the Great Temple is dedicated **Tlazolteotl
(Ixcuiname)**

jointly to HUITZILOPOCHTLI and Tlaloc. One of Chthonic or earth goddess.
Aztec (classical the best sculptures is from Cuilapan, Oaxaca
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Known locally from the (early classic period).
A tableau among the palace gulf coast region of Huaxteca. A maternal
goddess murals of Tepantitla is allegedly dominated by linked with
sexual sin and personifying filth. One the god from whose hands flow
droplets of water of the group of fertility deities classed as the with
a background of trees, butterflies and TETEOINNAN complex.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p334}**Tomwo'get** 319

**Tloque Nahauque**

*(ruler of the near and*

through the magical power of a waterfall. His *the adjacent)*

priest wears similar attire to that of Nayenezgani, Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) but the mask is painted with red ocher except
for

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the Omeotl a triangular black
area bordered with white. It complex.

also has a fringe of yellow or red wool.

**Tna'nto**

*(dawn coming out)*

**Tokakami**

Spirit of the dawn. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

God of death. Huichol Indian (Mesoamerican) The apotheosis of the first
light of dawn in the

\[Mexico\]. His chief antagonist is the moon god-eastern sky.

dess METSAKA.

**Tnecei'vune**

*(dawn walking woman)*

**Toko'yoto** *(crab)*

Spirit of the dawn. Chukchee \[southeastern Guardian spirit. Koryak
\[southeastern Siberia\].

Siberia\]. The female consort of the dawn.

In Koryak tradition, one of the "owners" of the *See also* TNE'SGAN,
MRATNA'IRGIN, LIETNA'IR-world, the master and creator of the Pacific GIN
and NA'CHITNA'IRGIN.

Ocean. His name is that of a large sea crab. In some legends he is the
father of MITI, the mother of the Koryak people.

**Tne'sgan**

*(top of the dawn)*

Spirit of the dawn. Chukchee \[southeastern Siberia\]. One of four
beings controlling **Tomiyauhtecuhtli**

*(our male maize*

the dawn in different directions. Sacrifice is *efflorescence lord)*

made and blood is sprinkled in the appropriate Fertility and rain god.
Aztec (classical Mesoamer-direction.

ican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the TLALOC complex.

**Toa'lalit**

God of hunters. Bella Coola Indian \[British Columbia, Canada\].
Oversees the hunting of **Tomor**

mountain goats. He is invisible, but great hunters Creator god. Illyrian
\[Albania\]. Also a god of the may catch a glimpse of his hat, moccasins
or winds. Depicted in human form attended by mountain staff moving
about. His animals are the eagles and still invoked by rural peasants.

lynx and raven.

**Tomwo'get**

*(self-created)*

**Tobadzistsini**

*(child of the water)*

Archetypal creator being. Koryak \[southeastern War god. Navaho \[USA\].
Considered younger Siberia\]. The consort of Ha'na and father of and
inferior to NAYENEZGANI, the chief war Supreme Being, TENANTO'MWAN, and
of Big god of the Navaho. His mother conceived him Raven, QUIKINNA'QU.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p335}320 **Tonacacihuatl** **Tonacacihuatl**

*(our flesh lady)*

Ilhuicatl Huixtotlan (heaven of the salt fertility Primordial deity.
Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) goddess).

\[Mexico\]. In the most widely accepted Aztec cosmogony, this is the
self-created, eternal, female principle who combines with T

**Tonatiuh**

ONACATECUHTLI

*(soaring eagle)*

to create all life, transferring souls from heaven to Creator god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) the mortal womb. It exists in the highest,
thir-

\[Mexico\]. He presides over the fifth (present) teenth heaven and once
engendered the sun god world age, personified by the sun Ollin and desT

tined to end in a cataclysmic earthquake. He is the EZCATLIPOCA, from
whom all other deities in the pantheon stemmed. One of the group classed
ruler of the fourth of the thirteen heavens known as the Omeotl complex.
Also Omecihuatl.

at the time of the Spanish conquest; also called Ilhuicatl Tonatiuh (the
heaven of the sun). In other texts, specifically codices *Borgia, Cospi*
and **Tonacatecuhtli**

*(our flesh lord)*

*Fejervary-Mayer,* he is depicted as a temple deity.

Primordial deity. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. In the most widely accepted Aztec cos-Tonenili

mogony, this is the self-created, eternal, male Rain god. Navaho
\[USA\]. The so-called "lord of principle who combines with
TONACACIHUATL

the celestial waters," he controls the rain from to create all life. It
exists in the highest, thirteenth the skies as opposed to that of lakes,
rivers and heaven and once engendered the sun god TEZ-seas. He is said
to scatter his waters to the four CATLIPOCA, from whom all other deities
in the cardinal points and storm clouds begin to gather.

pantheon stemmed. Also one of the group classed He is also the
water-carrier for the other gods in as the OMETEOTL complex. According
to tradi-the pantheon. He wears a blue mask with a fringe tion
Tonacatecuhtli drove four roads through the of hair and a spruce collar,
but is otherwise naked center of the earth after the cataclysm of the
save for a scarlet loin-cloth and a leather belt with fourth world age
(Atl) to disperse the flood waters silver ornamentation and a fox skin
dangling at of the deluge. His four sons, aided by four the back. His
attributes, in mythology only, are unnamed beings, raised the fallen sky
which they two wicker water-bottles, one blue and one black, propped up
on great trees created by Tezcatlipoca whose strings are rainbows.

and QUETZALCOATL at the four cardinal points.

*See also* TLAHUIZCALPANTECUHTLI, EHECATL-QUETZALCOATL and
MICTLANTECUHTLI.

**Topoh**

In alternative mythology Tonacatecuhtli is the Astral god. Pokot and Suk
\[Uganda and western ruler of the sixth of the thirteen heavens known at
Kenya, East Africa\]. The son of the creator god the time of the Spanish
conquest, Ilhuicatl Yayauh-TORORUT and his consort SETA, he is god of
the can (the blackish heaven). Also OMETECUHTLI.

evening star.

**Tonaleque**

**Tork**

Goddess. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-Mountain god.
Pre-Christian Armenian. Of ter-ico\]. The ruler of the fifth of the
thirteen heavens rifying appearance, he is the guardian deity of known
at the time of the Spanish conquest, mountains and their inhabitants.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p336}**Toyo-Uke-Bime** 321

**Tornarssuk**

*(big tornak or shaman)*

**Totoltecatl**

Supreme being. Inuit. The master of the *tornat,* Fertility god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) the group of controlling deities. He is
essentially

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the benevolent and can be
communicated with Ometochtli complex concerned with the maguey through
the individual *tornak* of a *shaman*. His plant and the brewing of the
alcoholic drink home is in the underworld in the land of souls. He
pulque.

is described as being of vague appearance, possibly in the guise of a
huge bear, though in Greenland Inuit tradition he lives in the sea,
appearing **Tou Mou**

as a large fat seal with long tentacles (i.e. possibly Goddess of
measure. Chinese. Usually depicted a cuttlefish). He devours the souls
of those he can with many arms and with a caste mark on her capture.
With the introduction of Christianity he forehead, suggesting that she
derives from the was syncretized with the devil.

goddess of the aurora, MARICI, in Indian Buddhism. She is considered to
live in the constellation of Ursa Major and may also be an aspect of
**Toro**

the astral goddess TIN HAU.

Creator god. Ngbandi \[Democratic Republic of Congo, central Africa\].
He is perceived as a great serpent, the son of KANGALOGBA, who is both
the **Touia Fatuna**

*(iron stone)*

spirit of the dragonfly and the symbol of the Earth goddess. Polynesian
\[Tonga\]. The daughter sacred river Oubangui.

of Kele (slime) and Limu (seaweed), she is the apotheosis of rock deep
in the earth and is periodically in labor, at which time she rumbles
**Tororut**

and shakes and produces children.

Creator god. Pokot and Suk \[Uganda and western Kenya, East Africa\]. He
is invoked in a special annual ceremony, which involves the sacrifice of
an ox, to ensure safety of crops and cattle. The **Toumou**

same ritual is performed in times of drought, God of uncertain function.
Egyptian. A deity famine or plague. His brother is A whose mummy was
allegedly kept at Heliopolis.

SIS the sun god.

His consort is SETA and their children include the rain god ILAT, ARAWA
the moon and TOPOH

the evening star.

**Toyo-Uke-Bime**

Goddess of foodstuffs. Shinto \[Japan\]. An ambiguous deity often
identified with Inari, she is **Totatis**

See TEUTATES.

said in the *Kojiki* to be a daughter of Waku-Musubi-No-Kami and a great
granddaughter of IZANAGI and IZANAMI. Her main sanctuary is the
**Totilma'il** *(father-mother)* Geku in Ise, whither she was allegedly
removed Creator being. Mayan (Tzotzil, classical Meso-from Tamba after
the emperor had received a american) \[Mexico\]. An androgynous
personality dream-message from the sun goddess AMATERASU

who represents the ancestral source of creation.

in AD 478.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p337}322 **Tozi**

**Tozi**

**Trimurti**

Goddess of healing. Aztec (classical Mesoameri-Collective title for the
major triad. Hindu. A can) \[Mexico\]. Also the deity of sweet water
three-headed representation of BRAHMA, VISŇU

remedial baths.

and SˇIVA as one entity. Contested by some authors, who argue that
Brahma, who is almost invariably represented with four heads, would be
**Trailokyavijaya** *(lord of three worlds)* included here with only
one.

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). Seen standing on the Hindu deities Mahesvara
(SˇIVA) and GAURI.

**Tripura**

*(lady of the three cities)*

Color: blue. Attributes: arrow, bell, bow, club, Mother goddess. Hindu
and Jain. In Jainism hook, noose, prayer wheel, staff and sword. Also
regarded as one of the ASTAMATARAS *.* In Hin-an alternative name for
ACALA.

duism the SAKTI of Tripurantaka, an *ugra* (terrible) representation of
the god SˇIVA, alternatively a form of the goddess PARVATI. The "three
cities"

**Trayastrinsa**

*(the thirty-three)*

are the cities of gold, silver and iron, one in Collective name for the
group of *deva* gods.

heaven, one in the air and one on earth, which Hindu (Vedic). One of the
many lists of Sˇiva destroyed in his form as Tripurantaka.

deities in Hinduism, this one is contained in Tripura is depicted
attended by vultures. Attrib-the *Rg Veda* and includes thirty-three
names utes: book, hook, noose and rosary.

divided into three groups of eleven in each of the three worlds.
Subsequently, the *DEVAS*

were separated into eight VASUS, twelve **Trita**

*(Aptya)*

ADITYAS, eleven *RUDRAS* and two *ASVINS.* In later God(dess). Hindu
(Vedic). Known from the *Rg* Hinduism the number thirty-three is
increased *Veda.* An obscure form of Indra with strong water
hyperbolically to 330 million and *deva* refers to attributes. Also
Aptya.

gods excluding the major triad of BRAHMA, VISŇU and SˇIVA.

**Tritons**

Minor sea gods. Roman. The children of POSEIDON and AMPHITRITE who are
depicted as hybrid **Triglav**

fish-men. Generally included in the royal court of God of war. Slav
(Baltic). The head of the panthe god Neptune. Attributes: conches.

theon in Stettin and also mentioned in association *See also* NEPTUNUS.

with Brandenburg, he is described in chronicles as bearing three heads.

**Trivikrama** *(taking three steps)* God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). It
may originally **Trikantakidevi**

*(goddess of three thorns)*

have been the name of a sun god, but is taken as Goddess. Hindu. Of
terrible appearance. Color: the incarnation of VISŇU which strides the
world part red, part black. Attributes: conch, two lamps, in three steps
in his dwarfish manifestation, and is prayer wheel and teeth.

linked with the Hindu perception of the three

[]{#index_split_007.html#p338}**Tu (2)** 323

parts of the world---heaven, air and earth. His god NAYENEZGANI. He is
also attributed with the SAKTI is SANTI. Normally depicted with the left
creation of all the big game animals. He is thought leg raised.
Attributes: arrow, bow, club, conch, to walk on a rainbow and ride a
blue steed. He is knife, lotus, noose, plough, prayer wheel, staff never
depicted in art nor impersonated.

and sword.

**Tsuki-Yomi**

**Trograin**

Moon god. Shinto \[Japan\]. Engendered from the Minor god. Celtic
(Irish).

right eye of IZANAGI immediately after AMATERASU was engendered from the
left. There is very little reference to him in the sacred texts and
**Tsai Shen**

his is a highly aesthetic form of worship. Allegedly God of wealth.
Chinese. The deity associated he slew the food *KAMI* Uke-Mochi. He is
depicted with mandarins. He is depicted wearing a pink riding a horse
and a number of sanctuaries are robe associated with Yin and the season
of spring.

addressed to his cult, including the two Tsuki-His attributes include a
ring of coins around the Yomi-No-Miya shrines in the Ise Jingu temple.

hem of the robe, a lotus motif of fertility on the He also enjoys an
ancient sanctuary on the island breast and a golden mushroom, a symbol
of of Iki. Also Tsuki-Yomi-Otoko.

longevity, carried in the hand. One of his attendants carries a deer
horn, symbol of potency, while the other carries a bowl of money and a
**Tsunigoab**

*(wounded knee)*

sheaf of golden grass.

Creator god. Khoi \[Namibia, southwestern Tsai Shen may appear in
company with FU

Africa\]. As his name suggests, he walks with a SHEN, god of luck, and
SHOU LAO, god of limp. His injury was sustained in a primordial
bat-longevity.

tle with his arch rival GAUNAB, the god of darkness, who was eventually
driven away to live in the black heaven. Tsunigoab used to be invoked at
**Tsa'qamae**

dawn each day.

God of salmon migration. Qwe'gsotenox Indian

\[British Columbia, Canada\]. The so-called "head winter dancer," his
attributes include head ring **Tu (1)**

and neck ring of bark to which heads are Chthonic earth goddess.
Chinese. A fertility spirit attached.

also identified as she who was invoked to bring good harvests by
phallic-shaped mounds of earth left in the fields.

**Tsohanoai**

*(day bearer)*

Sun god. Navaho \[USA\]. Not regarded as a supreme god, Tsohanoai moves
across the sky, **Tu (2)**

invisible, behind the disc of the sun, *sa,* which is his Primordial
god. Polynesian. One of three ele-shield. His consort is the fertility
goddess EST-ments, with TANE and LONO, who existed in SANATLEHI and he
is the father of the war chaos and night which they broke into pieces,

[]{#index_split_007.html#p339}324 **TUATHA DE DANANN**

allowing day to come in. Tu represents stability. He grated and
individual members were placed in the is also regarded as a war god.
Also KU (Hawaiian).

ranks of fairies.

**TUATHA DE DANANN**

**Tule**

*(peoples of the*

Spider god. Zande \[Sudan and Democratic *goddess Danu)*

Republic of Congo, Africa\]. He descended from **ORIGIN** Celtic
(Irish). Collective name for the the sky on a rope, carrying all plants
and seeds.

pantheon.

He was also responsible for giving mankind water **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** prehistoric times and the tools of cultivation.

until Christianization circa AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** none.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** various throughout Ireland, **Tumatauenga**

but chiefly Tara.

God of war. Polynesian (including Maori). One of **ART REFERENCES**
various stone sculptures and the children of the prime parents RANGINUI
and reliefs.

PAPATUANUKU, he proposed the slaughter of his **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Books of Invasions; Cycles of* parents when it was decided to separate
them as *Kings;* votive inscriptions.

sky and earth. He was subsequently given charge over mankind (
*tangata*) *,* which he imbued with An association of deities probably
going back to his lust for the warfare and violence that was a
pre-tribal times. The deities include the DAGDA, characteristic part of
Maori culture. Also LUG, GOBNIU, Nuadu Argatlam and others and
Kumatauenga (Hawaiian).

represent a possibly non-tribal hierarchy of the supernatural joined
against a common foe, the powers of destruction and misfortune, the
**Tu-Metua** *(stick-by-parent)* *Fomoire,* and the *Fir Bolg* who were
allegedly an God. Polynesian \[Hervey Islands\]. The sixth child
agricultural tribe from Greece. These were pre-of VARI-MA-TE-TAKERE, the
primordial mother.

historic invaders of Ireland who were defeated in Torn from her right
side, he stays with her in the two battles fought at Moytura.

confined space at the bottom of the world Tradition claims that the
Tuatha arrived in Ire-coconut and lives in endless silence.

land under the leadership of the god NUADA from somewhere in the north.
Four places relating to **Tumuteanaoa** *(echo)*

their country of origin are mentioned in old Goddess. Polynesian
\[Hervey Islands\]. The text---Falias, Finias, Gorias and Murias. No
fourth child of VARI-MA-TE-TAKERE, the pri-further details are given.
Having defeated the mordial mother. Torn from her right side, Fomoire
and the Fir Bolg, they are said to have Tumuteanaoa lives in
Te-Parai-Tea (hollow gray become the rulers of Ireland.

rocks) below the home of the god TANGO.

The Tuatha de Danann mythology is familiar to all the Celtic races and
the names of the gods and goddesses, with local variations, are also
**Tunek**

known from Welsh mythology. Under Christian God of seal hunters. Inuit.
A fearsome being of influence the position of the pantheon was deni-huge
stature (13 feet tall) who lives on the ice

[]{#index_split_007.html#p340}**Tzultacah** 325

fields and is capable of running very fast. He also carrying a rudder
or, alternatively, cornucopiae.

sits in his *kaiak* in the fog and catches seal in huge Also mentioned
as Agathe Tyche, the consort of traps.

Agathos Daemon. She became widely identified with the Asian mother
goddess KYBELE but was replaced, in Roman times, by the goddess
FOR-Turan

TUNA and associated symbolically with a wheel Goddess of love. Etruscan.
The tutelary deity of device. She retained popularity for a long time.

Vulci, she is depicted bearing wings and with There is a record that the
Emperor Julian sacri-attributes including a swan, a dove and a blossom.

ficed to Tyche at Antioch in AD 361-2 and her temple was still intact
during the reign of Theodosius (379-95).

**Turms**

Chthonic underworld god. Etruscan. Modeled on the Greek messenger god
HERMES, with *caduceus* **Tyr**

See TIWAZ.

(winged rod), winged shoes and cloak, he leads the souls of the dead
toward the underworld.

**Tzontemoc** *(head-descending)* Minor underworld god. Aztec (classical
**Tutu**

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group God. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akkadian). The classed as the MICTLANTECUHTLI complex.

tutelary god of Borsippa, near Babylon, during the reign of Hammurabi in
the old Babylonian period, but later superseded by NABU.

**Tzu Sun Niangniang**

Mother goddess. Chinese. One of the "nine dark ladies" of the pantheon
who are regarded as **Tvastar** *(carpenter)*

having a protective role. She was the mortal wife Creator god. Hindu
(Vedic). The "divine builder"

of a minor official and, having borne him who fashions living creatures
on earth. The five sons and two daughters, committed suicide Hindu
equivalent of the Roman god VULCANUS.

in order to ensure her future chastity. She is An ADITYA or sun god and
the father of SARANYU.

invoked at weddings to provide children, Attributes: *homajakalika* (an
uncertain fire device), especially sons, and special cakes are eaten by
ladle and two lotuses. Also Tastar; Tvashtri; the bride and groom. One
of her more famous VISVAKARMAN.

sanctuaries, on the island of Taiwan, is the Yin Yang Stone.

**Tyche**

Goddess of fortune. Greco-Roman. She appears **Tzultacah** *(mountain
valley)* as a nereid in the *Hymn to Demeter* (Homer).

Chthonic and thunder gods. Mayan (classical According to Hesiod's
*Theogon* y she is the daugh-Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. A group of
deities who ter of OKEANOS. Elsewhere she is identified as combine the
features of earth and rain gods.

the daughter of ZEUS and HERA. She is depicted Although there are
considered to be an indefinite

[]{#index_split_007.html#p341}326 **Tzultacah** number of Tzultacahs,
only thirteen are invoked which are dispatched to punish mankind for in
prayers. They live in, and may personify, wrongdoing. Non-poisonous
varieties are sent to springs and rivers, but each is the owner of a
spe-discipline against minor offenses, rattlesnakes for cific mountain.
They are attended by snakes more serious depravity.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p342}U

6

**Ua-Ildak**

**Ugar**

Vegetation goddess. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Vegetation god. Western
Semitic (Syrian). Possi-Akkadian). The deity responsible for pastures
and bly linked with the Canaanite city of Ugarit \[Ras poplar trees.

Sˇamra\].

**Ubertas**

**Ugracandika**

*(violent Canda)*

Minor god of agriculture. Roman. Known Distinct form of the goddess
DURGA. Hindu particularly from the reign of Tiberias in (Epic and
Puranic). One of a group of NAVADUR-the second century

GAS, the "nine durgas."

BC and associated with

prosperity.

**Ugratara**

*(violent Tara)*

Goddess. Hindu (Puranic). A terrible deity who **Ucchusma**

carries a cup and a corpse upon her head.

God. Buddhist. An emanation of AKSOBHYA or RATNASAMBHAVA. Also a form of
JAMBHALA. He is depicted as pot-bellied and stands upon Kubera, **Ukko**

the Hindu god of riches, who lies with jewels Thunder god. Pre-Christian
Finnish. Drives a spewing from his mouth. Attributes: cup, ichneu-cart
which generates flashes of lightning as the mon fly, image of Aksobhya
in the hair, moon horses' hoofs hit stones along the way; the noise disc
and snakes. Three-eyed.

of thunder comes from the wheels or from Ukko grinding corn with a big
stone. Attributes: ax, blue robe, hammer and sword.

**Udadhikumara**

Generic name of a god. Jain \[India\]. One of a group of deities under
the general title of **Ukur**

*BHVANAVASI* (dwelling in places). They have youth-Chthonic underworld
god. Mesopotamian (Baby-ful appearance.

lonian-Akkadian).

327

[]{#index_split_007.html#p343}328 **ULL**

**ULL**

*\[Gothic\]*

*(glory)*

capacity. He lives in the upper world, and "in the **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic) and Germanic. May west."

have originated as an early northern German *See also* URU'N AJY TOYO'N.

sky god, but also connected with fertility and with the sea.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times **Uma**

until Christianization circa AD 1100.

A form of the goddess PARVATI. Hindu (Puranic).

**SYNONYMS** Ullr.

Uma is identified as the consort of Chan-CENTER(S) OF CULT none known,
but several drashekhara, a form of SˇIVA which includes place names in
Norway and Sweden allude.

the moon among his attributes. The meaning of **ART REFERENCES**
possibly the subject of anony-her name is unclear, but possibly has
maternal mous carvings.

connotations. As Uma Maheshvara she fought **LITERARY SOURCES**
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* with demons including Mahisha.
Attributes: (Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); place names.

lotus, mirror, rosary and waterjar.

*See also* SOMASKANDA.

A sky god of Asgard, but with some links to the VANIR gods. The son of
SIF and stepson of THOR, he is responsible for justice, and oaths were
once **Umashi-Ashi-Kabi-Hiko-Ji-No-Kami** sworn over the "ring of Ull."
He may also have a *(pleasant reed shoot prince elder deity)* role in
the fertility of crops. Skaldic verse men-Creator being. Shinto
\[Japan\]. The fourth of the tions the "ship of Ull," presumed to be a
reference deities to be listed in the *Kojiki* sacred text. He was to
the use of Ull's shield as a boat. A scabbard engendered from the reeds
floating on the pri-excavated in Denmark in the third century AD

mordial waters and is perceived as a remote and bears a runic
inscription "servant of Ull." Accord-vague figure who hides himself from
mankind.

ing to Snorri he wears a bow and snow shoes.

Saxo describes him crossing the sea on a magic bone---a ski? He may have
a sister, Ullin.

**Umvelinkwangi**

Creator god. Zulu \[South Africa\]. He engendered all plants and animals
on earth and is the father of **ULU'TUYAR ULU TOYO'N**

*(titular*

the god UNKULUNKULU, who was born from a *horrible lord)*

reed and engendered mankind.

**ORIGIN** Yakut \[central Siberia\]. Malevolent creator spirit.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times **Uni**

until circa AD 1900.

Tutelary goddess. Etruscan. The consort of the **SYNONYMS** none.

sky god TIN and linked with the region of Perugia.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** no fixed sanctuaries.

**ART REFERENCES** possibly wood carvings.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *The Yakut* (Jochelson).

**Unkulunkulu**

Creator god. Zulu \[South Africa\]. The androgy-A creative being
superintending the *ICCI* (masters nous son/daughter of UMVELINKWANGI,
and the or owners) and generally seen in a destructive progenitor of
mankind, he was born from a reed.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p344}**Usas** 329

**Unumbote**

**Urasˇ**

Creator god. Bassari \[Togo, West Africa\]. Engen-Chthonic earth
goddess. Mesopotamian (Sumer-dered all living things on earth.

ian). One of the named consorts of the sky god AN and the mother of
NIN'INSINNA.

**Unxia**

Goddess of marriage. Roman. Concerned with anointing the bridegroom's
door.

**URU'N AJY TOYO'N** *(white creator lord)* **ORIGIN** Yakut \[central
Siberia\]. Creator spirit.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** prehistoric times **Upakesini**

until circa 1900 AD.

Minor god. Buddhist. An attendant of A **SYNONYMS** AYI'-URU'N TOYO'N
(lord bright RA-creator).

PACANA.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** no fixed sanctuaries.

**ART REFERENCES** possibly sculptures in wood.

**Upapattivasita**

**LITERARY SOURCES** *The Yakut* (Jochelson).

*(control of fitness)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of a group A creator being said to live in
the zenith of the of VASITAS personifying the disciplines of spir-upper
world, and also "in the northeast," superin-itual regeneration. Color:
mixed. Attribute: a tending the ICCI (masters or owners). He may also
creeper.

personify the sun. He tends to act for good and horses were sacrificed
to him. Generally addressed by a beneficent or white *shaman* (ajy
ayuna).

**Upayaparamita**

*(perfecting success against* *See also* ULU'TUYAR ULU TOYO'N.

*enemies)*

Philosophical deity. Buddhist. Spiritual offspring of RATNASAMBHAVA.
Color: green. Attributes: **Usas**

jeweled staff and staff on yellow lotus.

Goddess of the dawn. Hindu (Vedic). The daughter of Dyaus and, according
to some texts, the consort of the sun god SURYA. An auspicious
**Upulvan**

*(like the blue lotus)*

deity, Usas brings the dawn, heralding Surya, Local god. Singhalese
\[Sri Lanka\]. The most sen-and drives away darkness. She is the
all-seeing ior of the four great gods of the Singhalese pan-eye of the
gods. In the *Rg Veda* she is depicted as theon. Identified with VISŇU,
according to one a beautiful young virginal figure who rides in a
tradition his specific task was to protect the cul-hundred chariots. She
sets all things in motion ture of Sri Lanka from Buddhism. Conversely he
and can render strength and fame to her devo-stood by Gautama BUDDHA
against the Hindu tees. In addition to being perceived as a sky MARA.

goddess, she is also drawn as a mother goddess in the guise of a cow.
Epithets include "mother of the gods" and "mother of cows." She is
**Uranos**

See OURANOS.

invoked to give the boon of longevity, but a

[]{#index_split_007.html#p345}330 **Usins**

more malignant aspect reveals her as a huntress jewel, noose, prayer
wheel, staff and waterjar.

who wastes human life. Usas sometimes Three-eyed, three-headed and with
eight arms.

enjoys a domestic worship as a guardian hearth goddess who drives away
darkness and evil spirits. She disappears, however, from the
**Uttarabhadrapada**

later traditions of Hinduism.

Minor goddess of fortune. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A moderate
*NAKSATRA*; daughter of DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Usins**

Astral god. Pre-Christian Latvian. Associated with both the morning and
evening star and also **Uttaraphalguni**

has links with bee-keepers and spring. Under Minor goddess of fortune.
Hindu (Epic and Christian influence he becomes absorbed into the
Puranic). A moderate *NAKSATRA*; daughter of figure of St. George.

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Uslo**

**Uttarasadha**

Spirit of mountains. Yakut \[central Siberia\]. One Minor goddess of
fortune. Hindu (Epic and of the guardians of the natural world answering
to Puranic). A benevolent *NAKSATRA*; daughter of the mountain owner
XAYA ICCITA.

DAKSA and wife of CANDRA (SOMA).

**Usnisa**

**Uttu**

God. Buddhist. A *dikpala* or guardian of the Vegetation goddess and
goddess of weaving.

zenith direction. Also a collective term for a Mesopotamian (Sumerian).
Not to be confused group of eight deities, including Usnisa, who are
with UTU the sun god, Uttu is a minor deity perceived as extensions of
the DHYANIBUDDHAS.

whose father is ENKI. According to legend, Enki **NOTE:** the word
describes, additionally, a type first impregnated the mother goddess
NINHUR-of curled hairstyle found in the characteristic SAG

˜ A, whose nine-day gestation produced the iconography of *buddhas*.
Color: yellow. Attributes: goddess NIN-SˇAR. She in turn was impregnated
by jewel, lotus, prayer wheel and sword. Three-Enki and, after a similar
nine-day gestation, gave headed.

birth to the goddess NINKURRA. Through the same procedure with her
grandfather, Ninkurra conceived the goddess Uttu. She is depicted as the
**Usnisavijaya** *(victorious)* goddess of weaving and of spiders.

Primordial goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Form of VAIROCANA, widely
worshiped in Tibet.

Regarded as a female BODHISATTVA or *buddha*-

**UTU**

designate, and a *dikpala* or guardian of the zenith **ORIGIN**
Mesopotamian (Sumerian) \[Iraq\]. Sun direction. Also a deification of
literature. One of god.

a group of DHARANIS. Color: white. Attributes: **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 3500 BC to arrow, bow, image of the BUDDHA on a lotus
leaf, circa 1750 BC.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p346}**UTU** 331

**SYNONYMS** SˇAMASˇ (Akkadian).

goddess NINLIL. His brother and sister are ISˇKUR

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Sippar.

and INANA. He rises "in the mountains of the **ART REFERENCES** plaques,
votive stelae and glyp-east" and sets "in the mountans of the west." He
tics.

is usually depicted wearing a horned helmet and **LITERARY SOURCES**
various creation epics and carrying a saw-edged weapon not unlike a
prun-other texts.

ing saw, which it is thought he has used to cut through the side of a
mountain from which he Utu is the power of sunlight and, in a social
emerges, symbolizing the dawn. He may also context, of justice and the
implementation of law.

carry a mace and stand with one foot on the He is the son of the moon
god NANNA and the mountain.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p347}V

6

**Vac** *(speech)*

**Vadali**

1\. Goddess of the spoken word. Hindu (Vedic).

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-In some texts she is a
daughter of DAKSA and con-dant of MARICI. Attributes: flower, needle,
noose sort of KASYAPA. Alternatively she is the daughter and staff.

of Ambhrna. Also known by the epithet "queen of the gods," Vac is the
personification of the phenomenon of speech and oral communication. She
**Vagbija** *(seed of speech)* gives the boon of hearing, speech and
sight and Minor goddess. Hindu (Puranic). An aspect of she can lead a
man to become a Brahman. She the goddess SARASVATI in the form of a
*bija mantra*.

also personifies truth and sustains soma---the liq-The embodiment or
apotheosis of consciousness uid essence of vision and immortality. She
is said representing the sacred word.

to have created the four Vedas, the basis of the earliest Hindu
mythology.

**Vagisvara** *(lord of speech)* Though she takes a prominent place in
the Rg God of speech. Buddhist. The tutelary deity of Veda, Vac largely
disappears from later Hindu Nepal. An emanation of all DHYANIBUDDHAS

traditions. She may have become syncretized with (spiritual meditation
*buddhas*) and a variety of the goddess of wisdom, SARASVATI. She is
gener-MANJUSRI. Accompanied by a lion or seated upon ally depicted as an
elegant womanly figure a lion throne. Attribute: blue lotus.

dressed in gold, but in the secondary capacity of a mother goddess she
is also drawn as a cow.

2\. God. Buddhist. An emanation of AMITABHA **Vagitanus**

and a variety of MANJUSRI.

Minor god of passage. Roman. The guardian of the infant's first cry at
birth.

**Vacuna**

Minor goddess. Sabine. A sanctuary dedicated to **Vahagn**

this deity is known to have existed near the villa God of victory.
Pre-Christian Armenian. Con-belonging to the poet Horace. She may be
syn-sidered to epitomize bravery, he is depicted born onymous with DIANA
or MINERVA.

from a fire and with flames for hair.

332

[]{#index_split_007.html#p348}**VAIROCANA** 333

**Vahguru**

traveled the world teaching mankind various arts Creator god. Sikh.
Worshiped in the Golden and crafts. He is said to have crossed the
Pacific Temple of Amritsar, in northern India. He has no Ocean walking
upon the water.

icons.

In the chief sanctuary at Cuzco the deities of the pantheon were
represented in gold statues, that of Vairacocha being the most
important. It **Vaikuntha**

is described as having been the size of a small Aspect of VISŇU. Hindu
(Puranic). Visňu is boy, right hand upraised with fist clenched, but
depicted under this title residing in his own with the thumb and
forefinger stretched out. His heaven, known as Vaikuntha. He is seen
with four full Inca name, contracted by the Spanish heads in an
attribute known as caturmukha, invaders, is Ilya-Tiqsi Wiraqoca
Pacayacaciq where the central head is human, that to the left (ancient
foundation, lord, instructor of the is Sakti, to the right NARASINHA,
and facing world). The title Vairacocha has been used by behind, VARAHA.
As such Visňu's vehicle is either South American Indians into recent
times to the mythical bird, GARUDA, or he reposes on the address white
people.

serpent ANANTA (SESA). The aspect may also be known as Trailokyamohana.

**Va'irgin** *(I exist)*

**Vaimanika**

Supreme being. Chukchee \[eastern Siberia\]. A Generic title for a group
of deities. Jain \[India\]. A remote and poorly defined character who
lives class of gods said to be borne by, or living within, in the zenith
of the sky and who created a flying palace, the *vimana*.

the world. Comparable with the Koryak deity TENANTO'MWAN.

**VAIRACOCHA**

**ORIGIN** Inca \[Peru\]. Creator god.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa AD 400 to **VAIROCANA** *(coming from
the sun)* circa AD 1500.

**ORIGIN** Buddhist \[India\]. The first and oldest **SYNONYMS**
Huiracocha; Viracocha.

*dhyanibuddha* or meditation *buddha.*

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** Cuzco

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 500 BC to **ART REFERENCES** various
sculptures in stone and present.

precious metals and carvings (all lost).

**SYNONYMS** Buddhaheruka.

**LITERARY SOURCES** none.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** pan-Asiatic.

**ART REFERENCES** metal and stone sculp-The creator of all other
supernatural beings and tures, paintings.

of men and animals, Vairacocha is perceived to **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Sadhanamala* and Tantric rule the heavens in the fashion of an Inca
ritual texts.

emperor. He is the source of all divine power, but not immediately
concerned with administration One of five mystic spiritual counterparts
of a of the world and appears only in times of crisis.

human *buddha* in Vajrayana Buddhism. A prod-He is also depicted as a
heroic figure who once uct of the ADIBUDDHA who represents the

[]{#index_split_007.html#p349}334 **Vairotya** branch of the cosmos
concerned with bodily **Vajradaka**

form. He originates from the white mantra syl-God. Buddhist (Mahayana).
An emanation of lable OM and lives in the zenith paradise. His AKSOBHYA
bearing one, three or four heads.

icon is normally placed in the innermost part of a *stupa* or shrine.
His SAKTI is VAJRADHATVISVARI and he is normally accompanied by a lion
or two **Vajradhara**

dragons. Color: white. Attributes: three monk-God. Buddhist. An epithet
of the ADIBUDDHA but ish robes and prayer wheel. He is also taken as a
also an allegory for the highest *buddha.* Known tutelary deity in
Lamaism \[Tibet\] in which case particularly from Nepal and Tibet. His
SAKTI *is* his attributes include bell and prayer wheel.

PRAJNAPARAMITA. Attributes: cup, hook, noose, Emanations include chiefly
SAMANTABHADRA regal ornaments and staff. Three-headed.

but also CUNDA, GRAHAMATRKA, MAHASAHAS-RAPRAMARDANI, MARICI,
NAMASANGITI, Sitatap-atraAparajita, USNISAVIJAYA and Vajravahi. See
**Vajradhatvisvari** *(lady of the adamantine* also AKSOBHYA, AMITABHA,
AMOGHASIDDHI and *world)*

RATNASAMBHAVA.

Goddess. Buddhist. The SAKTI of VAIROCANA and also a variety of MARICI.
Attributes: many, including an image of Vairocana on the crown.

**Vairotya** *(having an ax and a goad)* Goddess of learning. Jain
\[India\]. One of sixteen Vidyadevi headed by the goddess Sarasvati.

**Vajragandhari**

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Color: blue or gold. Attributes:
arrow, ax, bell, bow, hook, image of AMOGHASIDDHI, knife, noose,
**Vaisnavi**

prayer wheel, staff, sword, and trident.

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A SAKTI of VISŇU, also
regarded as a form of LAKSMI. In later Hinduism she became one of a
**Vajragarbha**

*(substance of a thunderbolt)* group of MATARAS regarded as of evil
intent. Also God. Buddhist (Vajrayana). A BODHISATTVA or one of a group
of eight ASTAMATARAS. In another *buddha*-designate. Color: blue.
Attributes: blue grouping one of nine NAVASAKTIS who, in south-lotus,
book and staff.

ern India, rank higher than the SAPTAMATARAS.

Her vehicle is the hybrid beast GARUDA. Attributes: child, club, conch,
lotus and prayer wheel.

**Vajraghanta**

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). A female *dikpala* or guardian of
the northern direction.

**Vajracarcika**

Color: green or white. Attributes: staff with bell.

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of AKSOBHYA, she stands upon
a corpse. Color: red.

Attributes: cup, image of Aksobhya on the crown, **Vajramrta**

*(immortal of the Vajra sect)* jewel, lotus, skull with noose, staff and
sword.

God. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of Three-eyed.

AMOGHASIDDHI. His vehicle is an animal of

[]{#index_split_007.html#p350}**Vali** 335

uncertain identity. Color: green. Attributes: bell, emanation of
RATNASAMBHAVA or a form of club, hook, prayer wheel, staff and sword.

Bhrkuti. She stands upon a lotus. Color: golden.

Attributes: arrow, blue lotus, bow, conch, hook, images of the five
Dhyanibuddhas on the crown, **Vajrapani**

noose and staff. Three-eyed.

God. Buddhist \[mainly Tibet\]. An emanation of AKSOBHYA but also
sometimes identified with ADIBUDDBA. Generally thought to reflect the
sec-Vajravarahi *(diamond sow)* ond *DHYANIBUDDHA* or spiritual
meditation *bud-Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana) and Lamaist *dha*.
Sometimes depicted with a peacock.*

\[Tibet\]. An emanation of VAIROCANA and some-Alternatively considered
to be a counterpart of times identified as the SAKTI of HEVAJIRA. In the
Hindu god INDRA. Color: dark blue or white.

Lamaism she accompanies VAJRADAKA. She is Attributes: noose, snake and
staff. Also Acala-depicted treading on a man. Color: red.
Attrib-Vajrapani; Acarya-Vajrapani.

utes: principally club, cup, image of Vairocana on the crown and knife,
but with an assortment of other attributes from time to time. Three-eyed
**Vajrapasi**

and three-headed.

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). A female *dikpala* or guardian of
the southern direction.

Color: yellow. Attributes: staff with noose.

**Vajravidarani** *(tearing asunder)* Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). Attributes: arrows, banner, bow, hook, noose, shield, staff
**Vajrasphota**

and sword. Five-headed.

Goddess. Buddhist. A female *dikpala* or guardian of the western
direction. Attribute: staff.

**Vajrayogini**

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). She can **Vajrasrnkhala**
*(personification)* sometimes be identified carrying her severed head 1.
Minor goddess. Buddhist. One of the Mahayana in her hand. Color: yellow.
Attributes: club, cup, deities said to be an emanation of AMOGHASIDDHI.

knife and staff. Three-eyed.

Some texts describe her as the SAKTI of HEVAJIRA.

Color: green. Attributes: arrow, bow, cup, image of Amoghasiddhi on the
crown, mane, noose skin, **Vajrosnisa**

and staff. Three-eyed and three-headed.

God. Buddhist. Apparently connected with the 2. Goddess of learning.
Jain. One of sixteen guardian deities or *dikpalas* in the easterly
direc-VIDYADEVI headed by the goddess SARASVATI.

tion. Color: white.

*See also* PADMANTAKA.

**Vajratara**

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). Considered to **Vali**

be an emanation of all the DHYANIBUDDHAS or God. Nordic (Icelandic). One
of the sons of spiritual meditation *buddhas.* Also identified as an
OTHIN, his mother is RIND. A hardened, bold

[]{#index_split_007.html#p351}336 **Valli**

warrior and an excellent shot. He slew HODER

**VANIR**

and thus avenged the death of BALDER. One of **ORIGIN** Nordic
(Icelandic). A major group of the survivors of Ragnarok destined to live
in the Norse deities concerned primarily with peace land which replaces
Asgard, Idavoll. Also Ali.

and prosperity and with the fertility of the land.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** Viking period circa AD 700 and earlier,
until Christianization circa **Valli**

AD 1100 and in some instances beyond.

Goddess. Hindu. The second consort of SKANDA, **SYNONYMS** none.

usually depicted standing to his right. In its orig-CENTER(S) OF CULT
various throughout areas of inal context the word Valli may mean
"earth."

Nordic influence, but particularly at Uppsala in Sweden.

**ART REFERENCES** stone carving and sculpture; **Valtam**

artwork on weapons, etc.

God. Nordic (Icelandic). According to the Poetic **LITERARY SOURCES**
Icelandic codices; *Prose Edda* Edda (Balder's Dreams) Valtam is the
father of (Snorri); *Historia Danica* (Saxo); various classi-OTHIN.

cal authors.

A smaller race of deities than the AESIR gods led **Vamana**

by OTHIN. The most important among them are Incarnation of the god
VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and FREYR and FREYJA. The sea god, NJORD, had
Puranic). The fifth *avatara* of Visňu which originally been a Vanir but
became hostage to the appears as a dwarf, symbolizing the puny state of
Aesir when the two races were at war.

mankind in the cosmos. According to legend, the god took the guise in
order to trick BALI, a great-grandson of Hiranyakashipu (see NARASINHA),
**Varaha** *(boar)*

whose prestige had begun to overshadow that of Incarnation of the god
VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and INDRA. To restore a proper balance Vamana
Puranic). The third *avatara* of Visňu, which requested from Bali a plot
of land three paces appears as a boar. According to legend, he wide on
which to meditate. Visňu returned to descends in this guise to the
bottom of the his proper stature and claimed heaven and primeval sea to
rescue the earth, which has been earth in two steps. He declined to take
the third removed there by a demon. He retrieves it in the which would
have also claimed the underworld, shape of a girl. The *avatara* may be
depicted in but instead gave its rule to Bali. The dwarfish wholly
animal form or as a human with a boar's form bears two arms. Attributes:
umbrella and head. Epithets include Adivaraha.

waterpot.

**Varahi**

**Vana-Durga**

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A Aspect of DURGA. Hindu
(Puranic). A form of SAKTI who in later Hinduism becomes one of a the
goddess invoked by woodsmen and foresters.

group of MATARAS regarded as of evil intent.

She often wears an elephant skin, is eight-armed Also one of a group of
eight ASTAMATARAS. In and carries an assortment of weapons.

another grouping, one of nine NAVASAKTIS who,

[]{#index_split_007.html#p352}**Vasudeva** 337

in southern India, rank higher than the SAPTA-Varuna is one of the major
Vedic gods, concerned MATARAS. She sits upon a boar, buffalo or ele-with
the secure operation of the world's systems phant. Attributes: boar's
head, bow, club, cup, and of water. Lord of the *ASURA* class of
deities, he knife, noose, plough, sword and trident.

is thought to equate with the Persian deity Ahura MAZDA. In later times,
a *dikpala* or guardian of the western direction. He is also regarded as
an **Varahmukhi** *(having a boars head)* ADITYA or sun god, the son of
Kardama and con-Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-sort of
GAURI.

dant of MARICI. Attributes: arrow, bow, flower In southern India he is
still worshiped during and staff.

periods of drought, particularly in coastal regions where he is thought
to live in trees.

In Vedic times his sacred animal was the ram. He **Varali**

rides upon a fish or sea monster, or in a chariot Minor goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-drawn by seven horses. Attributes: conch,
lotus, dant on MARICI. Color: white. Attributes: flower, parasol, sacred
thread, snake noose, trident and needle, noose and staff.

water jar with jewels. Pot-bellied and four-headed.

**Vari-Ma-Te-Takere**

*(the very beginning)*

**Vasantadevi**

Mother goddess. Polynesian \[Hervey Islands\].

Goddess of spring. Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

The creator being who lives at the very bottom of Particularly known
from Tibet, where she the world coconut, sitting in a cramped space
appears in the retinue of SRIDEVI. Her animal is a with her knees and
chin touching. She lives in mule. Attributes: cup and sword.

Te-Enua-Te-Ki (mute land) in eternal silence and is the mother of six
children, all deities, three of which she plucked from her right side
and three **Vasita** *(willpower)*

from her left.

Generic title for a group of goddesses. Hindu.

*See also* AVATEA, TINIRAU, TANGO, TUMU-Twelve deities who personify the
disciplines TEANAOA, RAKA and TU-METUA.

which result in spiritual regeneration.

**VARUNA** *(coverer)*

**Vasu(s)** *(excellent)*

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Vedic, Puranic and early Tamil) Generic title for a
group of gods. Hindu (Vedic).

\[India\]. Major guardian deity.

Eight deities attendant on the Vedic weather god **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1700 BC until INDRA, comprising day, dawn, fire, moon,
pole present.

star, sun, water and wind. Generally carrying a **SYNONYMS** none.

rosary and with a SAKTI.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** throughout India but as a rain god in the south.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and reliefs in metal **Vasudeva**

and stone.

God. Hindu. The princely father of KRSNA and **LITERARY SOURCES** *Rg
Veda,* etc.

BALARAMA. Consorts include DEVAKI, ROHINI, etc.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p353}338 **Vasudhara** **Vasudhara**
*(treasurer)* reposed on a fig leaf that floats upon the primeval 1.
Fertility goddess. Hindu (Epic and ocean of a new cosmos after the
previous world Puranic). The SAKTI of Kuvera.

order has been destroyed.

*See also* KUBERA.

2\. Goddess. Buddhist. A female bodhisattva or *buddha*-designate who is
the Sakti of Vajrasattva **VAYU (1)** *(the wind)*

and a form of AKSOBHYA or RATNASAMBHAVA.

**ORIGIN** Hindu \[India\]. God of the winds.

Color: yellow. Attributes: book, ear of rice, **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 1700 BC to images of Aksobhya and Ratnasambhava on the
present.

crown, parasol, pearl and waterjar with jewels.

**SYNONYMS** PAVANA.

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** none specific.

**ART REFERENCES** sculptures and carvings in **Vasumatisri**
*(beautiful with an excellent mind)* metal and stone.

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An atten-LITERARY SOURCES the Vedic
texts, including *Rg* dant of VASUDHARA.

*Veda.*

One of the most important deities of the Vedas. In **Vasusri**

*(beautiful one)*

later Hinduism he evolves into a *dikpala* or Minor goddess. Buddhist
(Mahayana). An atten-guardian of the northwestern quarter. He is also
dant of V

depicted in some texts as a chariot-driver for the ASUDHARA.

god AGNI. Color: dark blue. Attributes: arrow, hook, prayer wheel, staff
and waterjar.

**Vasya-tara**

*(the subjected Tara)*

Goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of **Vayu (2)**

AMOGHASIDDHI and considered to be indistin-God. Buddhist. A *dikpala* or
guardian of the guishable from ARYA-TARA. Color: green.
Attrib-northwestern quarter.

utes: blue lotus and image of Amoghasiddhi on the crown.

**Vayukumara**

God. Jain \[India\]. One of the groups under the **Vata**

general title of *BHVANAVASI* (dwelling in places). Of God of wind.
Hindu (Vedic) and Persian \[Iran\].

youthful appearance.

The name appears in the *Rg Veda* as a deity of violent personality.
According to Asvestan tradition the god of victory, VERETHRAGNA,
appeared to **Ve**

Zarathustra in the guise of Vata.

God. Nordic (Icelandic). Listed by Snorri in the *Prose Edda* as one of
the sons of Bori and, among the gods of Asgard, the brother of OTHIN and
**Vatapattrasayin** *(reclining on a fig leaf)* VILI. The three gods are
said to have made the Aspect of VISŇU. Hindu (Puranic). The image is
land and sea out of the flesh and blood of the found in classical bronze
sculptures and repre-primeval giant Ymir.

sents either Visňu in a violent form, or KRSNA, *See also* BURI.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p354}**Verbti** 339

**Ve'ai** *(grass woman)*

**Venkata**

Vegetation spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

Form of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and The personification of the
grasslands and their Puranic). According to the *Aditya Purana*,
guardian deity. She is perceived as a *shamanka* and Venkata is a deity
of considerable importance in is the consort of EME'MQUT.

southern India. The name does not occur in the north. He is worshiped
extensively by Hindus but particularly in the Tamil shrine of Tirupati
where **Veive**

there is argument that the deity depicted is SˇIVA Minor god. Etruscan.
A youthful deity whose or KARTTIKEYA. The image appears to carry
attributes include arrows. His animal is a goat.

attributes of Visňu on the left and Sˇiva on the right. Also Venkatesa.

**Veja Mate**

Goddess of winds. Pre-Christian Latvian. Also **VENUS**

responsible for birds and woodlands.

**ORIGIN** Roman. Goddess of sexual love and beauty.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to **Velaute'mtilan** *(sedge
man)* circa AD 400.

Vegetation spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

**SYNONYMS** APHRODITE (Greek); Dione; Cytherea.

The personification of the sedges and there-CENTER(S) OF CULT various;
Eryx \[Sicily\] (as fore guardian of the boggy tundras and their Venus
Erycina).

animals.

**ART REFERENCES** various sculptures including the Venus of Milo.

**LITERARY SOURCES** Aeneid (Virgil), etc.

**Veles**

Chthonic underworld god. Slav. Also identified as The name is neuter in
form but Venus is modeled the "cattle god." Also Volos.

on the Greek goddess Aphrodite. In Roman mythology she is a daughter of
JUPITER and Dione.

Her consorts include Mars and the ill-fated ADO-Velu Mate

NIS. She is also linked romantically with Anchises, Chthonic underworld
goddess. Pre-Christian King of Troy. She is a goddess of gardens. In the
Latvian. The "queen of the dead." She is depicted second century AD the
Emperor Hadrian dedicated wearing white and she greets the dead at the a
sanctuary to her on the Via Sacra in Rome; it was cemetery.

restored as late as the fourth century.

Venus was celebrated in the *Veneralia* festival on April 1.

**Venda**

Creator god. Dravidian (Tamil) \[southern India\].

**Verbti**

An ancient vegetation deity. Worshiped in vil-God of fire. Pre-Christian
Albanian. He is asso-lages on the plains, thought to live in trees and
ciated with the north winds. Under Christian equated with Indra.

influence he becomes identified with the devil.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p355}340 **Verethragna** **Verethragna**

Her mortal attendants are the Vestal Virgins, God of victories. Persian
\[Iran\]. He is embodied selected for office as guardians of the sacred
flame by the wild boar which possesses iron-shod feet to from the age of
six for a minimum of thirty years, crush opponents and is perceived to
be present in during which they were expected to maintain the wind.

strict vows of chastity on penalty of burial alive.

The Vestals dressed in white gowns edged with purple and were highly
respected members of **Vervactor**

Roman society, enjoying many privileges. During Minor god of ploughing.
Roman. Associated with *Vestalia* festivals, donkeys were decked with
sacrifices to TELLUS and CERES.

wreaths. The worship of Vesta was abolished by the Emperor Theodosius in
AD 380.

**Vertumnus**

Minor god of gardens and orchards. Roman. Of **Vetali**

Etruscan origin, he is the consort of the goddess Goddess of terrifying
appearance. Buddhist-POMONA. Usually represented with garden Lamaist
\[Tibet\]. One of a group of *gauri*. Color: implements and offered
fruit and flowers. He was red. Attribute: a chain.

celebrated annually in the *Vertumnalia* festival on August 13.

**Victoria**

Goddess of victory. Roman. Known particularly **VESTA**

from the second century BC and closely linked **ORIGIN** Roman. Goddess
of fire and the hearth.

with JUPITER. Became adopted by the Christian **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** circa 400 BC to church in an angelic capacity.

AD 400.

**SYNONYMS** HESTIA (Greek).

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** many sanctuaries through-Vidar

out Italy, but centered on the circular temple God of war. Nordic
(Icelandic). A little known in Rome where allegedly the Palladium of
AESIR god, described as the silent one. One of the Troy with the sacred
flame of the gods was sons of OTHIN. An alternative tradition places
preserved.

him as the offspring of a brief liaison between **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures and reliefs.

THOR and the giantess Gird. A god of great **LITERARY SOURCES** Aeneid
(Virgil), etc.

strength and support in times of danger. The prospective avenger of
Othin's death by the wolf Vesta was worshiped with considerable
celebra-Fenrir at Ragnarok, he is said to wear a shoe tion in the
various public *Vestalia* festivals, but she made of material collected
throughout time was also popular as a household guardian. She which he
will place between Fenrir's jaws before enjoyed a small sanctuary at the
foot of the Pala-he tears them apart and runs the beast through tine
Hill. She is generally depicted as a woman of with his sword. One of the
survivors of the final great beauty holding a lighted torch and a votive
great fire and flood, destined to live in Asgard's bowl.

successor, Idavoll.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p356}**Vimala** 341

**Vidyadevi**

GANESA. Color: blue. He is also seen as a *dikpala* Generic title for a
group of goddesses. Jain or guardian of the northerly direction, in
which

\[India\]. Sixteen deities led by SARASVATI who are case his color is
green. Attributes: cup, drum, associated with knowledge or learning.

hook, knife, noose and staff. Three-headed. Also Analarka.

**Vidyapati-Lokesvara**

God. (Buddhist). A variety of the **Vighnesvaranugramurti**

BODHISATTVA

AVALOKITESVARA. Depicted resting on a lotus, his Family of deities.
Hindu (Puranic). A popular attributes include a fly-whisk.

depiction in art of SˇIVA (colored black) and Parvati with their son
GANESA after he has been decapitated by his father and given the head of
an **Vidyesvara**

elephant by way of replacement.

Generic title for a group of deities. Hindu. Eight liberated or
emancipated "beings" who are con-Vijaya *(victory)*

sidered to be aspects of SˇIVA.

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). An EKADASARUDRA

(one of the eleven RUDRA deities).

**Vidyraja**

Hiranyaksa is considered one of his incarnations.

Tutelary god. Buddhist (Mahayana). One of sev-Attributes: club, knife,
rosary and staff. Vijaya is eral deities who are concerned with the
imple-also the name of the bow of INDRA.

mentation of the law.

**Vikalaratri** *(twilight night)* Minor goddess. Buddhist (Mahayana).
An atten-Vidyujjvalakarili

*(tongues of fire)*

dant of BUDDHAKAPALA.

Goddess. Buddhist. A twelve-headed form of Akajata who is said to have
been formed in the BUDDHA's sweat. She is often depicted trampling
**Vili**

the four Hindu deities BRAHMA, INDRA, SˇIVA and God. Nordic (Icelandic).
Listed by Snorri in *Prose* VISŇU. Color: blue or black. Attributes:
many *Edda* as one of the sons of Bori and, among the and varied.

gods of Asgard, the brother of OTHIN and VE.

The three gods are said to have made the land and sea out of the flesh
and blood of the primeval **Vidyutkumara**

giant Ymir.

God. Jain \[India\]. Belonging to one of the groups *See also* BURI.

under the general title of *BHVANAVASI* (dwelling in places). Of
youthful appearance.

**Vimala** *(stainless)*

Minor goddess. Buddhist (Vajrayana). One of sev-Vighnantaka *(remover of
obstacles)* eral deified BHUMIS recognized as different spir-God.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An emanation of itual spheres through which a
disciple passes.

AKSOBHYA who may equate with the Hindu god Color: white. Attributes:
lotus and staff.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p357}342 **Vina**

**Vina**

**Virtus**

Goddess of music. Buddhist. The personification God of military prowess.
Roman. Known partic-of a lute. Color: yellow. Attribute: a lute.

ularly from the second century BC.

**Vindhya**

**Virudhaka** *(sprouted)* Mountain god. Hindu. Personification of the
hills God. Buddhist. A *dikpala* or guardian of the forming the northern
edge of the Deccan area of southerly direction. Color: blue or green.
Attrib-central India.

utes: skin from the head of an elephant and sword.

Also identified as the head of a group of demons, the *kumbhandas.*

**Virabhadra** *(great hero)* War god. Hindu (Epic and Puranic).
Considered to be a form of SˇIVA, and occasionally of VISŇU,
**Virupaksa**

*(misinformed eyes)*

Virabhadra acts as a martial aspect of Sˇiva against 1. God. Hindu.
Epithet of SˇIVA and one of the the god DAKSA, who according to some
accounts EKADASARUDRAS or eleven RUDRA deities. Attrib-abused Sˇiva's
wife SATI and drove her to angry sui-utes: ax, bell, club, cup, drum,
hook, knife, lotus, cide by self-immolation to avenge the slight. He
prayer wheel, rosary, Sakti and sword. Three-is depicted bearing four
arms. Attributes: arrow, headed.

bow, shield and sword. He sometimes wears a 2. God. Buddhist. A
*dikpala* or guardian of the necklace of skulls. Three-eyed and
three-headed.

western direction. God of snakes. Color: red.

Attributes: jewel, snake and *stupa* or domed **Viraj**

shrine.

Primordial goddess. Hindu (Vedic). Identified as the active female
creative principle in the *Rg Veda.*

**Viryaparamita**

Philosophical deity. Buddhist. Spiritual offspring **Viraratri** *(night
of courage)* of RATNASAMBHAVA. Color: green. Attributes: blue Hindu.

lotus and jeweled banner.

*See also* CHINNAMASTAKA.

**VISŇU**

**Virbius**

**ORIGIN** Hindu (Vedic, Epic and Puranic) \[India\].

Minor chthonic god. Roman. A malevolent One of a triad of creator gods.

underworld deity who was frequently invoked **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
possibly from circa during the worship of Diana in the Arician wood-1700
BC until the present day.

lands surrounding her sanctuary at Nemi. Vir-SYNONYMS appearing as ten
major incarnations bius was reputed to prowl these woods and to be or
*avataras:* MATSYA, KURMA, Varcha, an emanation of Hippolytus, a mortal
who had Narashima, VAMANA, PARASURAMA, RAMA, been trampled to death by
his horses and made KRSNA or BALARAMA, BUDDHA, and KALKI(N).

immortal by Aesculapius. For this reason the Ari-Other epithets include
Abjaja, Abjayoni, cian woods were barred to horses.

Adhoksaja, Anantasayana, Aniruddha.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p358}**Visvamitra** 343

**CENTER(S) OF CULT** many sanctuaries through-Visňu is depicted with
many heads or with four out the subcontinent.

heads, generally with four arms, typically holding **ART REFERENCES**
sculptures generally in bronze; a wide assortment of attributes
including conch but also in stone. Reliefs.

and prayer wheel. He may also carry a discus, **LITERARY SOURCES** *Rg
Veda; Mahabharata* and which reflects a destructive aspect, a mace of
*Ramayana* epics; Puranic literature.

authority and a lotus. Around his neck may be the sacred stone, the
*kausrabha,* and typically he Visňu began, according to the Vedas, as a
minor has an obvious shock of chest hair.

cosmic deity imagined striding the sky in three giant steps---rising,
zenith and setting. He was never a solar god, but became briefly
associated **Visňu Trivikrama**

with the movements of the sun in the sky.

Form of the god VISŇU. Hindu (Epic and Visňu's prestige developed with
the Epics and of Puranic). Trivikrama is the transformation into a the
three deities making up the apex of the modern giant from Visňu's dwarf
*avatara* VAMANA, in Hindu pantheon, he is the most widely worshiped
order to confirm his dominance over the world by and pre-eminent (see
also BRAHMA and SˇIVA). The covering it in three huge strides.

keeper of civilized morality and order. In the *Mahabharata,* he is
partly identified with Krsna.

According to one Puranic legendary source, Visňu **Visvakarman**
*(architect of the universe)* was created from the left side of the
primordial cre-Poorly defined creator god. Hindu (Vedic). Sim-ator
force. The Puranas also provide complex clas-ilar to DYAUS PITAR, he is
described as the artist sifications for various aspects of Visňu. His
most of the gods who may be linked or identified with frequent consort
is the goddess of fortune, LAKSMI, TVASTAR. He evolved, as the son of
PRABHASA with whom he is often depicted standing or resting and
Yogasiddha, into an occasional consort of the on a lotus. His sacred
animal is GARUDA.

mother goddess SARASVATI.

Visňu is the preserver of the world. He rules real time, or history, and
through the concept of *karma* he maintains a moral balance which he
corrects **Visvaksena**

*(the all-conquering)*

occasionally in the guise of one of his incarna-Minor god. Hindu
(Puranic). The bodyguard tions. He is a chief adversary of YAMA, the god
of and gatekeeper of VISŇU. Tradition maintains the dead, and has the
power to repel death. He is that Visvaksena was slain by SˇIVA when he
also closely identified with sacred water or *NARA,* refused the latter
an audience with Visňu. For his presence pervading the Ganges. He is
believed this reason he is generally depicted in the form to sleep for
four months each year, resting on the of a skeleton impaled on the
trident weapon serpent SESA with a lotus sprouting from his navel,
carried by Sˇiva in his aspect of KANKALAMURTI.

after which he is roused by a special rite.

His attributes include a wheel, club and conch The followers of Visňu
are the Vaisnavas and shell.

are mainly in the north of India, though there exists a strong following
among the Tamils in the south. The Vaisnava caste mark is a V-shaped
sign **Visvamitra**

identified with water which has a property of Minor god. Hindu
(Puranic). According to descending.

legend, the father of the god NARADA.

[]{#index_split_007.html#p359}344 **Visvarupa** **Visvarupa**

sun gods was, in later times, enlarged to twelve, Lesser known
incarnation of the god VISŇU.

including Vivasvan. One of his titles is the Hindu. In Vedic literature
he is identified as the

"embodiment of ancestral law." His consort is son of TVASTAR. Visňu took
the *avatara* at the SARANYU and he is identified as the father of
request of ARJUNA. His animal is GARUDA. Attrib-YAMA and YAMI, as well
as MANU and the utes: many. Also Viratapurusa.

ASVINS. His color is golden and his attributes a forest garland, two
lotuses and a trident. Also Vivasvat.

**Visvosnisa**

God. Buddhist. An USNISA apparently connected with the guardian deities
or *dikpalas* in the **Vodu**

`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}`</i>`{=html}

[]{#index_split_008.html}

********

southerly direction. Color: green.

Collective name for gods. Fon \[Benin, West Africa\]. The origin of the
term *voodoo* in the Caribbean region.

**Vitthali**

God. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). A lesser known incarnation of the god
VISŇU (or KRSNA). The **Voltumna**

cult of Vitthali is centered mainly on Panharpur, Tutelary god.
Etruscan. Originally a vegetation near Bombay, where he is the object of
devotion deity who was elevated to the position of supreme by the
Varkari sect. Generally depicted standing god in the Etruscan pantheon
and known in on a brick, wearing a fez-like hat and with hands Roman
culture as VERTUMNUS.

on hips. Also Vithoba; Panduranga.

**Volumna**

**Vitzilipuztli**

Nursery goddess. Roman. The guardian deity of Aspect of HUITZILPOCHTLI.
Aztec (classical the nursery and of infants.

Mesoamerican). Invoked twice a year, in May and December, during an
agrarian festival.

Virginal female worshipers created an image of **Vor**

the deity from dough consisting of maize Goddess. Nordic (Icelandic). Of
Germanic ori-flour, beet seed and honey. The image was given gin, one of
the AESIR goddesses listed by Snorri in eyes and teeth using pieces of
colored glass and *Prose Edda*. He suggests that Vor may be con-whole
maize seeds and was paraded, before cerned with the making of oaths and
of marriage being broken into pieces and eaten as a form of agreements,
punishing those who break them.

sacrament.

Possibly also Var(a), though Snorri lists her as a separate Aesir
goddess.

**Vivasvan**

*(shining)*

Sun god. Hindu (Vedic and Puranic). The orig-Vosegus

inal Vedic list of six descendants of the goddess Mountain god.
Romano-Celtic. A local deity ADITI or ADITYAS, all of whom take the role
of from the Vosges known only from inscriptions.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p360}**Vyasa** 345

**Vrtra**

wrath. Thereafter he determined to shun the Demonic god of chaos. Hindu
(Vedic). A pri-company of other gods and set up home in the mordial
being who existed before the formation heart of Mount Etna, where he
fashioned a of the cosmos and who was slain by the mother giant forge.
His workers are the one-eyed goddess SARASVATI.

Cyclopes. He created a golden throne for Juno and he fashioned both
Jupiter's magical thunderbolts and Cupid's arrows. He enjoyed
**VULCANUS**

short-term relationships with various goddesses, **ORIGIN** Roman. God
of fire and forges.

including VENUS and MINERVA, and with one **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 400 BC to of the Graces. His offspring seem generally circa AD
400.

to have been monstrous. He was celebrated **SYNONYMS** HEPHAISTOS
(Greek).

in the *Vulcanalia* festival on August 23, which **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
tutelary god at the sea port coincides with the period of greatest
drought of Ostia.

and the highest risk of fire in Italy.

**ART REFERENCES** various sculptures and relief carvings.

**LITERARY SOURCES** *Aeneid* (Virgil), etc.

**Vyasa**

Minor incarnation of the god VISŇU. Hindu The patron god of artisans and
blacksmiths, (Vedic, Epic and Puranic). Vyasa is said to be the Vulcanus
is modeled closely on the Greek author of the Vedas, the *Mahabharata*
epic and Hephaistos. Attached to the smithy and rarely the Puranas. He
ranks with Hyagriva and SARAS-ascending Olympus, in Roman genealogy he
is VATI as a lord of knowledge and wisdom, and is the son of JUPITER and
JUNO. He is generally responsible for dividing the Tree of Knowlege
depicted as a rather grotesque figure with one into parts. In the texts
he is depicted as dark-leg shorter than the other, a deformity gained as
skinned and accompanied by four students, a result of being hurled to
earth by Jupiter while Sumanta, Paila, Vaisampayana and Jaimini. He
trying to protect his mother from the god's may be bearded. Also
Vedavyasa.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p361}W

6

**Wadd**

of the god of the primeval lotus blossom, Moon god. Pre-Islamic southern
Arabian. His NEFERTUM.

sacred animal is the snake.

**Wai**

**Wadj Wer** *(the mighty green one)* Sun god. Ntomba \[Democratic
Republic of Fertility god. Egyptian. Sometimes depicted in Congo,
central Africa\]. Probably originating as a androgynous form, he
personifies the Mediter-god of hunters who protects and controls the
ranean Sea or the major lakes of the Nile delta.

animals in the forest. He has a son, Mokele.

He is depicted carrying the *ankh* symbol of life, and a loaf. The
figure often appears pregnant and is associated with the richness of the
Nile delta **Waka**

waters.

Creator god. Oromo \[Ethiopia\]. Largely syncretized with the Christian
god, but regularly invoked in the morning.

**Wadjet**

Goddess of royal authority. Egyptian. Wadjet takes the form of a
fire-breathing cobra and, as **Waka-Hiru-Me**

the *uraeus* symbol worn on the headdress of Sun goddess. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Arguably the the ruler, she epitomizes the power of
sover-younger sister of the great Shinto sun goddess eignty. She is a
goddess of Lower Egypt equat-AMATERASU, or an early manifestation, she
is asso-ing to NEKHBET in Upper Egypt, with her main ciated with the
morning sunrise. Also involved cult center at Buto (Tell el-Farain) in
the Nile with weaving the garments of the *KAMI*.

delta. She forms an integral part of the symbolism of the sun god RE,
coiling around the sun disc to symbolize Re's powers of destruction.

**Wakan Tanka**

According to mythology, she created the Creator god. Dakota Indian
\[USA\]. A remote and papyrus swamps of the delta. She is described as
vaguely defined deity invoked by the *shamans* of a wet nurse to the god
HORUS and is the mother the tribe. Also a generic term equating to the
346

[]{#index_split_008.html#p362}**Wer** 347

spirit which, in an animistic and shamanistic reli-stone or boulder (
*HUACA*) set upright in the cen-gion, all things existing in nature
possess.

ter of a field.

**Waka-Sa-Na-Me-No-Kami**

**Waralden Olmai**

Agricultural goddess. Shinto \[Japan\]. The deity Tutelary god. Lappish
\[Finland\]. Revered as a specifically concerned with the transplanting
of creator and guardian deity.

young rice. A daughter of Ha-Yama-To-No-Kami and O-Ge-Tsu-Hime.
Generally served by Buddhist priests. *See also* WAKA-TOSHI-NO-KAMI and
**Wawki**

KUKU-TOSHI-NO-KAMI.

Guardian spirit. Inca (pre-Columbian South America) \[Peru, etc\]. The
apotheosis of a stone or *HUACA* which each Inca emperor carried with
him **Waka-Toshi-No-Kami**

as a personal tutelary deity. The object was known Agricultural god.
Shinto \[Japan\]. The deity as a "brother."

specifically concerned with the growing of young rice. A son of
Ha-Yama-To-No-Kami and O-Ge-Tsu-Hime. Generally served by Buddhist
priests.

**Weng Shiang**

*See also* WAKA-SA-NA-ME-NO-KAMI and God of literature. Taoist
(Chinese). His name KUKU-TOSHI-NO-KAMI.

tablet hangs on the wall in many Chinese houses.

**Wakonda**

**Wepwawet**

Creator god. Omaha Indian \[USA\]. A remote and God of passage.
Egyptian. Depicted as a jackal, vaguely defined deity invoked by the
*shamans* of Wepwawet began as a god of Upper Egypt, but the tribe. Also
a generic term equating to the his cult spread along the whole of the
Nile valley.

spirit which, in an animistic and shamanistic reli-According to Pyramid
Texts, he was born beneath gion, all things existing in nature possess.

a tamarisk tree in the sanctuary of the goddess WADJET at Buto. He is
also closely linked with the falcon god HORUS. He is perceived preceding
the **Wamala**

ruler either to or from battle, or to the afterlife, God of plenty.
Bunyoro \[Uganda, East Africa\]. A when his adze is used to break open
the mouth of sanctuary has existed near the royal palace and the dead
person. In a similar context he is linked Wamala is propitiated to give
the boon of chil-to the sun god RE when he "opens the dawn sky"

dren, domestic animals and crops. He is also seen to the deceased. As a
god of passage, he also opens in an oracular capacity and has an
official inter-the way to the womb.

mediary.

**Wer**

**Wanka**

Storm god. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Akka-Guardian spirit. Inca
(pre-Columbian South dian). A minor deity linked with ADAD and America)
\[Peru, etc\]. The apotheosis of a tall AMURRU. His attendant is the
fierce guardian of

[]{#index_split_008.html#p363}348 **Weri Kumbamba** the pine forest,
Huwawa, the focus of one of the **Wi**

Gilgamesěpic sagas. Cult centers include Afis, Sun god. Sioux \[USA\].
The father of the goddess south of Aleppo.

WHOPE, his sacred animal is the bison.

**Weri Kumbamba**

**Windigo**

Creator god. Gishu \[Uganda, East Africa\]. A deity Ice god. Ojibwa
\[Canada\]. A terrible being embodied in rocks and specifically invoked
before formed of ice who symbolizes the starvation of and after
circumcision to ensure the speedy winter. There are said to be many
*windigos,* but recovery of the patient.

they are always referred to in the singular. Cannibalistic, the
*windigo* appears as an ice skeleton and a human being can be turned
into one **Whiro**

through possession.

God of death. Polynesian and Maori. Regarded as an errant son of the
creator deities, RANGINUI and PAPATUANUKU, Whiro stands as the chief
**Wiu**

antagonist of TANEMAHUTA, the creator god of God of war. Nuer \[Sudan\].
The word means light. He is, therefore, the personification of
dark-spear.

ness and evil. During the time of creation from chaos, Whiro is said to
have fought an epic battle against Tanemahuta in the newly formed
heavens.

**WODAN**

He was vanquished and forced to descend into the **ORIGIN** Germanic.
God of war.

underworld where he became ruler over the dead **KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP** prehistoric times and chief among the lesser underworld
deities until circa AD 500.

who are responsible for various forms of disease **SYNONYMS** Wotan;
Woden (Anglo-Saxon).

and sickness. In the temporal world the lizard, a **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
scattered forest sanctuaries.

symbol of death, embodies him, and various crea-ART REFERENCES stone
carvings and engravings tures of the night, including the owl and the
bat, on metal.

are earthly representatives from his kingdom, as **LITERARY SOURCES**
*Germania* (Tacitus); *Gothic* are such malignant insect pests as the
mosquito.

`</i>`{=html}

**War* (Procopius); *History of the Goths* (Jordanes); This deity is not
to be confused with the leg-Geography* (Strabo); *History of the World*
endary human voyager and adventurer of the (Orosius).

same name whose traditions have, in the past, often been muddled with
those of the god.

Wodan may have possessed similar characteristics to OTHIN, believed to
have been a Norse descendant of Wodan. Germanic tribes including the
**Whope**

Heruli, the Celtic Cimbri and the Goths all prac-Goddess. Sioux \[USA\].
The daughter of WI, the ticed sacrificial appeasement rites to Wodan,
sun god, and consort of the south wind. She is including stabbing and
burning. The Cimbri credited with giving the Sioux Indian the pipe of
hung their captives over bronze caldrons while peace through which
(narcotic) they commune priestesses cut their throats. Booty, including
with the great spirit WAKAN TANKA.

mutilated weapons, gold and silver, animals and

[]{#index_split_008.html#p364}**Wu'squus** 349

human sacrifices who had been hanged, strangled **Wu**

or had their throats cut, was also thrown into Sea god. Ewe \[Benin,
West Africa\]. His priest, sacred lakes as sacrifices for Wodan.

the Wu-no, invokes the god whenever the The classical writers
substituted the name of weather is too severe for the fishing boats to
land.

the Roman god Mercury, thus the same day of the He is propitiated with
offerings delivered from week is called Wednesday in English but
*mercredi* the shore and in past times was occasionally in French. Many
Anglo-Saxon kings traced their appeased with human sacrifice taken out
to sea royal lineage back to Wodan as divine ancestor.

and thrown overboard.

**Wong Taisin**

*(the great immortal Wong)*

**Wuriupranili**

`</i>`{=html}

*God. Chinese. Probably an incarnation or Sun goddess. Australian
aboriginal. The posi-avatara* of the god HUANG TI (the yellow tion of
Wuriupranili in the godly hierarchy is emperor), he is considered
benevolent. Closely unclear, but mythology explains that she carries
associated with a district in Kowloon which is a burning torch made from
tree bark and named after him. His cult arrived in Hong Kong that she
travels from east to west each day in 1915 from Kwangtung in the form of
a paint-before descending to the western sea and using ing brought by a
man and his son. It was installed the embers to light her way through
the underin a small temple in Wanchai. In 1921 a larger world beneath
the earth. The colors of the sanctuary was built, from public funds,
facing the sunrise and sunset are said to be a reflection of sea and
backed by Lion Rock.

the red ocher body paints with which she adorns herself.

**Wosret**

Localized guardian goddess. Egyptian. With a **Wu'squus**

cult center at Thebes, Wosret is, according to Spirit of darkness.
Chukchee \[eastern Siberia\].

some inferences, an early consort of the creator The personification of
the night and the sibling god AMUN and was superseded by MUT. She is of
NA'CHITNA'IRGIN, the spirit of the left-hand identified with the
protection of the young god dawn.

HORUS. Also Wosyet.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p365}X

6

**Xaya Iccita**

**SYNONYMS** Red Tezcatlipoca.

Mountain spirit. Yakut \[central Siberia\]. The **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Teotihuacan, Tenochtitlan.

owner or master of the mountains.

**ART REFERENCES** stone sculptures, murals and codex illustrations.

**LITERARY SOURCES** pre-Columbian codices.

**Xewioso**

Thunder god. Ewe. \[Benin, West Africa\].

A major deity of the Mesoamerican pantheons.

Depicted as a ram accompanied by an ax, he is The red *avatara* of the
sun god TEZCATLIPOCA also perceived as a fertility deity whose thunder
(see also MIXCOATL-CAMAXTLI). God of spring and lightning are
accompanied by rain.

and a symbol of the annual renewal of vegetation.

Often represented in ritual by a priest wearing the flayed skin of a
human sacrifice, seen to be the **Xil Sga'nagwai**

new vegetation of the earth which emerges after Medicine god. Haida
Indian \[Queen Charlotte the rains. The skin was worn for twenty-one
days.

Island, Canada\]. Said to appear as a raven.

Xipe Totec is also the tutelary god of precious metallurgists, including
goldsmiths.

**Xilonen**

Minor vegetation goddess. Aztec (classical **Xiuhtecuhtli**

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. An aspect of the maize Astral god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mex-goddess Chicomecoatl, personifying the
young ico\]. The ruler of the first or lowest of the thir-maize plant.

teen heavens known at the time of the Spanish conquest, Tlalticpac (on
the earth).

**XIPE TOTEC** *(our lord the flayed one)* **ORIGIN** Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].

**Xochiquetzal**

Vegetation god.

Goddess of fertility and childbirth. Aztec (classi-KNOWN PERIOD OF
WORSHIP circa AD 750 to cal Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. The mother of the
AD 1500, but probably much earlier.

demigoddess (unnamed) whose consort was Piltz-350

[]{#index_split_008.html#p366}**Xolotl Nanahuatl** 351

intecuhtli and who engendered the first mortals **Xolotl** *(monster)*

Oxomoco and CIPACTONAL. One of the group Monstrous deity. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) classed as the TETEOINNAN complex. A popular

\[Mexico\]. He performed the role of executioner deity among Aztec
women, the goddess is invoked when the gods sacrificed themselves to
create particularly to make a marriage fruitful. The bride mankind. He
then sacrificed himself. In alternative plaits her hair and coils it
around, leaving two tradition he tried to evade his own fate, but was

"plumes" representing the feathers of the Quetzal himself executed by
EHECATL-QUETZALCOATL.

which is sacred to Xochiquetzal. Pottery figurines Also one of a pair of
twins in the group classed as are adorned with plumes of feathers.
Worshiped the XIUHTECUHTLI complex, regarded as patron at various sites,
including Tula (Hidalgo). Also of the ball game.

recognized as the patron goddess of weavers.

**Xolotl Nanahuatl** *(rumour)* **Xochiquetzal-Ichpuchtli** *(maiden)*
Monstrous deity. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Minor fertility goddess.
Aztec (classical

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].
One of the group XIUHTECUHTLI complex, described as a twin of classed as
the TETEOINNAN complex. Depicted XOLOTL and co-patron of ball games.

as a youthful deity associated with sexual love, flowers and pleasure.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p367}Y

6

**Yacacoliuhqui**

*(curved nose)*

**Yah**

Minor god of commerce and merchants. Aztec Moon god. Egyptian. Yah may
have been an (classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the import to
Egypt brought by Semitic immigrants group classed as the YACATECUHTLI
complex.

who based his profile on the Mesopotamian god SIN. He is mentioned
largely from the twentieth century BC onward and is depicted in human
**Yacahuiztli** *(nose spine)* form, but can also be represented by the
falcon Underworld goddess. Aztec (classical Mesoamer-and the ibis.

ican) \[Mexico\]. With her consort YACATECUHTLI she engendered the night
in Aztec cosmogony.

One of the group classed as the MICTLANTE-Ya'halan

( *cloud man*)

CUHTLI complex.

Guardian spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\].

The son of the supreme being TENANTO'MWAN, **Yacapitzahuac**

*(sheep-nose)*

his consort is YINE'ANE'UT. In alternative tradi-Minor god of commerce
and merchants. Aztec tion he is the son of the supervisor being,
(classical Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. One of the INA'HITELAN. He is a
protector of young couples, group classed as the YACATECUHTLI complex.

and youths beat a sacred drum invoking the spirit to turn the heart of a
girl.

**Yacatecuhtli**

*(nose lord)*

God of commerce and merchants. Aztec (classical **Ya'halna'ut**

Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\]. Head of the group Guardian spirit. Koryak
\[southeastern Siberia\].

classed as the Yacatecuhtli complex.

**Ya'china'ut**

*(moon woman)*

**Yajna**

*(sacrifice)*

Moon spirit. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\]. The God. Hindu. A minor
*avatara* of VISŇU and personification of the moon.

embodiment of the Brahmanic ritual.

352

[]{#index_split_008.html#p368}**Yamm** 353

**Yaksas**

**Yamaduti**

Tree spirits. Hindu. Generic title for animistic Messenger goddess.
Buddhist (Mahayana). An beings mentioned circa fifth century BC by
attendant of YAMA. Her vehicle is a buffalo. Color: Panini.

blue. Attributes: cup, fly whisk, knife and lotus.

**Yaldabaoth**

**Yama-No-Kami**

Creator God. Gnostic Christian. The so-called Mountain god. Shinto
\[Japan\]. Specifically the

"prime parent" of Gnostic cosmogony, engendeity who comes down to the
rice paddies in dered by PISTIS SOPHIA out of the nothingness of spring
and returns in autumn. The festival of *No-chaos, provided with form and
given charge over *lde-No-Shinji* marks his descent.*

the substance of the cosmos.

Yaldabaoth is, at first, unaware of the existence **Yamantaka**

*(destroyer of Yama)*

of Pistis Sophia and, by his own powers, engen-Guardian deity.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\]. An ders seven androgynous beings, placing
them in emanation of A

seven heavens. He decrees himself alone and all-KSOBHYA and one of a
group of D

powerful, whereupon Pistis Sophia names him HARMAPALA with terrible
appearance and royal attire who guard the Dalai Lama. By tradition he
SAMAEL (blind god). Of his offspring, the most stifled the great rage of
Y

significant is S

AMA. His SAKTI is

ABAOTH, who stands against his Vidyadhara. He is also a

father and on the side of Pistis Sophia. When she *dikpala* or guardian
of the easterly direction. He tramples a number of crea-eventually
reveals herself to Yaldabaoth as pure tures including a man, and
possesses thirty-two radiant light, he is humbled.

arms and sixteen legs. Color: red, blue, black or white. Attributes:
many.

**Yama**

*(twin; alternatively the restrainer)* 1. God of death. Hindu (Vedic).
The son of **Yamari** *(enemy of Yama)* Vavasvan and Saranju, or of
SURYA and SANJNA, God. Buddhist (Vajrayana). Probably influenced his
consort is DHUMORNA or YAMI. Yama is also by the Hindu deities SˇIVA and
YAMA. His vehicle the judge of the dead and the twin sibling of Yami, is
a buffalo, his color red and his attributes a club, goddess of death.

a cup, a noose and a staff.

When KRSNA is perceived as the embodiment of the cosmos, his eye-teeth
are Yama. He evolved into a *dikpala* or guardian of the southerly
direc-Yami

tion. His animal is a black buffalo. Color: black.

Mother goddess. Hindu (Epic and Puranic). One 2. Guardian deity.
Buddhist-Lamaist \[Tibet\].

of seven SAKTIS who in later Hinduism became One of a group of
DHARMAPALA with terrible regarded as of evil intent. Also CAMUNDA.

appearance and royal attire who guard the Dalai Lama. He stands upon a
man. His colors may be red, blue, white or yellow. His attributes are
**Yamm**

most commonly a noose and staff, but may also God of the ocean. Semitic.
A Syrian deity who is be a club, a net, a shield, a sword, a trident and
mentioned briefly in an Egyptian papyrus as an two tusks.

extortioner of tribute from other deities.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p369}354 **Yamuna**

**Yamuna**

**Yayu**

Minor river goddess. Hindu. A daughter of SURYA Sky god. Ngbandi
\[Democratic Republic of and SANJNA and the sister of YAMA. She is
Congo, central Africa\]. One of seven gods described in Puranic texts
and associated with the invoked at daybreak.

river Yamuna on which lies the city of Mathura.

Color: blue.

**Yeloje**

Sun god. Yukaghir \[Siberia\]. A benevolent deity **YAW**

*(enemy*)

who personifies justice and morality. The rainbow Omnipotent god. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) is said to be his tongue. Also PU'GU;
Ye'rpeyen.

\[Mexico\]. A universal and generally malevolent deity. One of the group
classed as the TEZCATLIPOCA complex.

**Yemekonji**

Creator god. Mongo and Nkundo \[Democratic Republic of Congo, central
Africa\]. According to **Ya'qhicnin**

tradition, he gave the sun god Nkombe three parcels when the people
complained the world Creator god. Koryak \[southeastern Siberia\]. The
was too dark; two were brightly colored and one name given to the
Christian god by the Koryaks was a dull gray. Realizing that he was
about to be to distinguish him from their own supreme being, tricked,
Nkombe opened the gray parcel and the TENANTO'MWAN.

world was flooded with light.

**Yaro**

**Yemoja**

Creator god. Kafa \[Ethiopia\]. A sky god to Goddess of water. Yoruba
\[Nigeria, West Africa\].

whom sacrifice is still possibly enacted on hill The creatrix of all the
rivers in the area, particularly tops and river banks in rural areas.
Became the river Ogun. She is chiefly worshiped by women largely
syncretized with the Christian god. Also and the sacred river water is
considered a remedy Yero.

for infertility. She is propitiated with animal and vegetable
sacrifices. Attributes: cowrie shells.

**Yasodhara** *(preserving glory)* Goddess. Buddhist. The daughter of
Dandapani **Yen Kuang Niang Niang**

and the consort of the BUDDHA before he attained Mother goddess.
Chinese. One of a group of his full status.

"nine dark ladies" who have a protective function.

She cures the eye disease ophthalmia.

**Yauhqueme**

Fertility and rain god. Aztec (classical Mesoamer-Yhi

ican) \[Mexico\]. One of the group of deities classed Sun goddess and
bringer of light. Australian aboas the TLALOC complex.

riginal. She is said to have been jointly responsi-

[]{#index_split_008.html#p370}**Yine'ane'ut** 355

ble, with BAIAME, for the creation of humankind tion, the sanctuary of
Yhwh on Mount Gerizim and in particular for the Karraur group of abo-in
Samaria (northern kingdom) was re-dedicated rigines. Mythology records
that she was asleep in to ZEUS.

the darkness of the primordial Dreamtime until The name Yhwh is an
enigmatic "no name." It she was awakened by a loud roaring or whistling
survived into Christian religion, though it appears noise from Baiame.
As she opened her eyes the regularly only in the Jerusalem Bible.
Elsewhere, world became light and as she walked the earth in English
translation, it is now generally replaced plants grew in her footprints,
to be followed by by the term "Lord." "Jehovah" is a corruption animals
and, finally, humankind.

introduced circa AD 1200-1300.

The Old Testament writings, particularly the Psalms, are littered with
references indicating **YHWH** *(I am what I am)* acceptance of many
gods in the pantheon. Trans-ORIGIN Judaic \[Israel\]. Creator god.

lators have substituted euphemisms such as **KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP**
circa 1200 BC until

"saints" and "holy men."

present day.

Although Yhwh is perceived in human form, he **SYNONYMS** Yahweh;
JEHOVAH.

was not represented other than in romanticized **CENTER(S) OF CULT**
Hebron, Jerusalem until 587

Christian art. His presence is identified in Jewish BC but subsequently
throughout the Christian tradition only by the empty space of the Mercy
world.

Seat. He is wholly transcendent, without physical **ART REFERENCES**
none extant.

needs, and, according to Judao-Christian tradi-LITERARY SOURCES Vetus
Testamentum; Qum'

tion, has no consort. This universal deity became Ran manuscripts.

known as ALLAH in Islamic tradition.

The creator god of the southern tribes of Israel headed by Levi and
Benjamin. Possibly a copy of **Yina'mna'ut**

*(fog woman)*

the Egyptian deity ATUM (ATEN), introduced by Spirit of mists and fogs.
Yakut \[southeastern the pharaoh Amenhotep IV in the fifteenth
cen-Siberia\]. Her consort is fog man YINA'MTIAN and tury BC. The object
of monolatrous but not nec-she is believed to live in a mythical
settlement essarily monotheistic worship by the Hebrew with other
spirits.

settlers in Palestine. Arguably the first surviving concept of a truly
universal deity.

Yhwh is the god who, according to tradition, **Yina'mtian** *(fog man)*
was revealed to Moses on Mount Sinai (Mount Spirit of mists and fogs.
Yakut \[southeastern Horeb) and who provided the Covenant, the
Siberia\]. His consort is fog woman YINA'MNA'UT

ten tablets of law. He is said to sit in judgment and he is believed to
live in a mythical settlement between two facing cherubim on the Mercy
with other spirits.

Seat which rested above the focal point of Israelite worship, the Ark of
the Covenant ( *VT*

Exodus 25). Yhwh eventually superseded the **Yine'ane'ut**

northern god, EL, to become supreme deity of Guardian spirit. Koryak
\[southeastern Siberia\].

Israel. During the period of Hellenic occupa-One of the daughters of Big
Raven, QUIKINN.A'QU,

[]{#index_split_008.html#p371}356 **Yng**

regarded as a *shamanka* engaged in a constant **Yogesvari**

struggle with the underworld demons, the *kalau*.

Mother goddess. Buddhist (Epic and Puranic).

Her sister is Cana'ina'ut and she is the consort of Personifying desire
and listed among both the the earth spirit TANUTA.

SAPTAMATARAS and the ASTAMATARAS *.* Attributes: bell, club, drum,
shield, sword and trident.

**Yng**

Creator god. Nordic (Icelandic). Progenitor of **Yolkai Estan**

the earliest Swedish kings. Also, in Germanic tra-Fertility goddess.
Navaho \[USA\]. The sister of dition, ING, the father of the Baltic
coastal tribe, the principal fertility goddess, ESTSANATLEHI, she the
Ingwaeones.

was engendered by the gods, who gave life to an image made from white
shells.

**Yoalli Ehecatli** *(night wind)* Creator god. Aztec (classical
Mesoamerican) **Yspaddaden Pencawr**

\[Mexico\]. One of the group classed as the Omeotl God. Celtic (Welsh).
Possibly the counterpart of complex.

the Irish deity Balor and the Icelandic BALDER. In the legend of
*Culhwch and Olwen,* Olwen is identified as his daughter. He sets
Culhwch several **Yoaltecuhtf** *(lord of night)* difficult tasks before
he can obtain Olwen's hand.

Creator god. Aztec (classical Mesoamerican) Culhwch retaliates by
wounding him severely, but

\[Mexico\]. With his consort YACAHUIZTLI he he cannot be killed until
Olwen marries. This is engendered the night in Aztec cosmogony.

presumably a distorted fertility legend, the orig-The ruler of the sixth
of the thirteen heavens inal meaning of which is lost.

known at the time of the Spanish conquest, Teotlcozauhcan (the place of
the yellow god).

One of the group classed as the MICTLANTE-Yu Huang Shang Ti

CUHTLI complex.

Supreme god. Taoist (Chinese). He achieved paramount prominence during
the Sung Dynasty and the Jade Emperor is his earthly, mortal
incar-Yobin-Pogil

nation. As a deity he is remote and out of touch Forest spirit. Yukaghir
\[southeastern Siberia\].

with ordinary people. No iconography is applied The apotheosis of the
woodlands and their to him and he has no physical description. He
guardian deity.

engendered the universe from chaos and is the unifying principle of the
cosmos which is perceived to be divided into thirty-six heavens above
**Yocahu**

the earth. Also SHANG TI; Shang Di.

Tutelary god. Puerto Rico and Haiti. A benevolent deity, the son of the
universal mother, and known as the "great spirit." Believed to **Yu
Shih**

live in the sun. Also Marcoti; Jocakuvague-Rain god. Taoist (Chinese).
The so-called "master Maorocon.

of the rain," he provides rain to ripen the harvest.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p372}**Yu-ti** 357

He is often accompanied by the god of thunder, **Yum Kaax**

LEI KUNG.

Vegetation god. Mayan (classical Mesoamerican)

\[Mexico\]. The deity concerned with the growing and harvesting of
maize, but also of husbandry in **Yu-Chiang**

general. Depicted as a youthful figure with an ear God of ocean winds.
Chinese. He is depicted with of corn in his headdress. Also God E.

the body of a bird and a human face.

**Yu-ti**

**Yum Cimil**

Sky god. Taoist (Chinese). The title by which the God of death. Mayan
(Yucatec, classical

"Jade Emperor," the most senior deity in the Mesoamerican) \[Mexico\].
Depicted with a skull Taoist pantheon, is commonly known. He head, bare
ribs and spiny projections from the emerges as a deity circa AD
1000-1100 during the vertebrae, or with bloated flesh marked by dark
Sung Dynasty. The Chinese emperor is his rings of decomposition. He
wears bell-like orna-earthly and more accessible incarnation.

ments fastened in the hair. Sacrificial victims were *See also* Yu HUANG
SHANG TI.

offered to the god by drowning in the sacred pool or *cenote.* Also God
A.

[]{#index_split_008.html#p373}Z

6

**Zababa**

**Zarpanitu(m)**

God of war. Mesopotamian (Babylonian-Birth goddess. Mesopotamian
(Babylonian-Akka-Akkadian). The tutelary god of the city of Kisˇ, dian).
The consort of MARDUK whose marriage whose sanctuary is the
*E-meteursag.* Also was celebrated annually at New Year in Babylon.

Zamama.

Also Erua; SARPANITUM.

**Zalmoxis**

**Zemepatis**

Sky god. Thracian. Known from the writings of Chthonic god.
Pre-Christian Lithuanian. A tute-Herodotus. According to tradition he
lived for lary deity of farmers and guardian of cattle.

some time on earth and then became ruler of the underworld. His makeup
may have been influenced by the Osirian cult in Egypt.

**Zemi**

One of a pair of primordial beings. Puerto Rico and Haiti. Known as
Morobo and Binatel, they are the parents of all other deities, though
they **Zapotlantenan**

did not create the cosmos which, according to Healing goddess. Aztec
(classical Mesoamerican) belief, has always been in existence. They are

\[Mexico\]. Deity of medicinal turpentine and oint-depicted in stone,
wood or clay figures and are ment-dealers. One of the group classed as
the invoked in prayers. Two wooden *ZEMIS* used to be TLALOC complex.

kept in a sacred cave at Toaboyna in Haiti and were the subject of
several annual pilgrimages.

The sun and the moon were believed to have **Zara-Mama**

emerged from the cave.

Maize goddess. South American Indian \[Peru\]. A minor deity, models of
whom were made from the leaves of the plant and kept for a year before
**Zemyna**

being burned in a ritual to ensure a good maize Chthonic goddess.
Pre-Christian Lithuanian. A harvest.

deity with responsibility for vegetation and 358

[]{#index_split_008.html#p374}**ZEUS** 359

crops. She was invoked at sowing and harvesting gather. Tradition also
has it that his grave is on times.

Mount Yuktas, near Knossos on the sand of Crete, where he was "buried"
by the KOURETES.

Symbolized by the eagle and earning the sacri-Zephyrus

fice of bulls, Zeus is the strongest among the God of the south winds.
Roman. Announces the deities, but in origin he is a weather god
paral-arrival of spring.

lelling ISˇKUR (Sumerian), TESˇUB (Hittite) and HADAD (Semitic). He
rules the clouds and rain, delivers lightning and hurls thunderbolts
forged **Zethos**

by the one-eyed Cyclopes, the thunderbolt being God. Greek. Theban twin
god who had mortal his invincible weapon. In the same vein he is said
weaknesses. Comparable to Kastor.

to determine the outcome of battle; victors once draped his statues and
other monuments with spoils of war. The great and enduring festival of
**ZEUS** *(sky father)*

Zeus is that of Olympia, which became the mod-ORIGIN Greek. Head of the
Greek pantheon.

ern Olympic Games.

**KNOWN PERIOD OF WORSHIP** circa 800 BC but The father of gods and men
alike, according to undoubtedly earlier until Christianization circa
tradition, Zeus won his position of authority in a AD 400.

primeval battle against the TITANS who had held **SYNONYMS** Dyaus
(Indo-European); Diu-pater, sway in the time of his father Kronos;
Kronos JUPITER (Roman).

swallowed all his other children, but Zeus's mother **CENTER(S) OF
CULT** Athens (sanctuary begun by Rhea saved him by turning him into a
stone and Pisastratus and completed by Hadrian) and Zeus overthrew his
father. He swallowed Metis, throughout Greek sphere of influence where,
in thus combining strength and wisdom in a single every city, the major
temple is that of Zeus.

godly entity. His *noos*, his ability for pragmatism, **ART REFERENCES**
abundant sculpture and carving; became renowned and infallible and his
judgment votive inscriptions, etc.

was beyond criticism. Homer pictures him carry-LITERARY SOURCES *Iliad*
(Homer); *Theogony* ing the golden scales of justice. Zeus is surrounded
(Hesiod).

from birth by attendant youthful warriors known as Kouretes or
Korybantes.

Zeus leads the pantheon of twelve great Greek He is possessed of
enormous sexual vigor and gods illustrated on the Parthenon frieze and
is sired a vast number of offspring through an inces-probably modeled on
a western Asiatic precedent.

sant parade of goddesses and mortal partners. In His father is KRONOS,
his mother RHEA, or in this respect his philandering became an
embar-alternative tradition METIS (wisdom). His official rassment in the
late Hellenic philosophical age.

consort, though barely more so than in name, is His fathering of other
deities included APOLLO

HERA. He is a universal deity and through him and ARTEMIS through LETO,
HERMES whose comes all mortal sovereignty. He earned the finest mother
is MAIA, PERSEPHONE and DIONYSOS by and most opulent sanctuaries
throughout the DEMETER, and ATHENA whose mother was said to Greek world.
According to tradition, he lives on be Metis, but who emerged in full
armor from her the mountain in Thessaly which came to be known father's
forehead. Among the more notable of his as Olympus and where the storm
clouds are said to mortal children are HERAKLES, Perseus, ZETHOS

[]{#index_split_008.html#p375}360 **Zhang Guo-lao** and AMPHION, HELEN
and MINOS. He was also **Zibelthiurdos**

suspected of homosexuality with the young Tro-Storm god. Thracian.
Believed to send thunder jan Ganymede.

and lightning.

**Zhang Guo-lao**

**Zipakna**

God. Taoist (Chinese). One of the "eight immor-Earthquake god. Mayan
(classical Mesoamerican) tals" of Taoist mythology. Once mortal beings,

\[Mexico\]. Usually coupled with the god they achieved immortality
through their lifestyle.

KABRAKAN and identified as a creator of moun-According to tradition,
Zhang Guo-lao was a bat tains which Kabrakan subsequently destroys.

before he took human form. Attributes include a bamboo drum and sticks
and his attendant animal is an ass.

**Zoe** *(life)*

*See also* BA XIAN.

Goddess of life. Greek and Gnostic Christian.

The daughter of PISTIS SOPHIA who, according to Gnostic mythology,
became the consort of **Zhiwud**

SABAOTH to create the angels, Israel and Jesus Messenger goddess. Kafir
\[Afghanistan\]. A deity Christ.

connected and possibly syncretizing with the goddess DISANI but who,
according to legend, carried vital messages to the heroic god MON during
a **Zotz**

primordial battle between gods and giants. Mon Tutelary god. Mayan
(Zotzil Indian, Mesoamer-lives by a lake surrounded by fire, and the
god-ican) \[Guatemala\]. Manifest in the form of a bat.

dess's wings (a solitary inference that she can appear in the form of a
bird) are scorched in the process until Mon heals them. In some
variations **Zurvan**

Mon lives in the form of a bull which breathes God of temporal time and
fate. Persian \[Iran\].

fire. Also Zhuwut.

Once the focus of a cult of Zervanism in which he appeared as the father
of AHURA MAZDA, the god of light, and AHRIMAN, god of darkness, in
**Zhong-li Quan**

Zoroastrianism. He is perceived as a god of des-God. Taoist (Chinese).
One of the "eight immor-tiny and the controller of all roads which tals"
of Taoist mythology. Once mortal beings, mankind may take, leading
ultimately to the they achieved immortality through their lifestyle.

otherworld. He was adopted into Manichaean Attributes include a fan.

religion. Also Zervan.


